Democratic Alliance MP Mike Waters has written to Public Protector, Advocate Busisiwe Mkhwabane, to report State Security Minister David Mahlobo for “misleading Parliament and the public”. The Democratic Alliance has called out Mahlobo for contradicting himself and “fibbing” after telling the National Assembly yesterday that #FeesMustFall student leader Mcebo Dlamini had never been to his home and that the reported visit was just a reporting from a newspaper article. Mahlobo was responding to an oral question from DA member of Parliament, Belinda Bozzoli.  “Mahlobo seemed to forget that he himself revealed his relationship with Dlamini when, participating in a panel discussion hosted by the Institute for Security Studies on November 14, he declared: ‘And I happen to know Mcebo [Dlamini]. He has been to my house several times,’” the DA said. The opposition party believes that Mahlobo has “deliberately misled” Parliament and as a result has contravened the Executive Ethics Code, which states that “members of the executive may not wilfully mislead the legislature to which they are accountable”. Waters said his complaint invokes the Executive Members Ethics Act. Waters believed that Mahlobo had joined President Jacob Zuma and Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs Des van Rooyen as the latest members of the executive to “tell blatant lies to Parliament”. In addition to reporting Mahlobo, the DA would be moving a motion in the House today in order to censure Minister Mahlobo for deliberately misleading the House. The DA’s Louw Nel, chief of staff to the DA chief whip John Steenhuisen, said that the motion would happen before 5pm – after the member statements in Parliament. He was busy drafting the letter to the Public Protector when City Press contacted him. “Considering how confidently Mahlobo lied about his relationship with Dlamini, one can only wonder whether his pained denial of his friendship with self-confessed criminal and rhino horn smuggler, Guang Jiang Guan, is similarly deceitful,” Waters said. Waters has called Mahlobo’s “habit of lying” as a “disturbing trend” and has called on the Public Protector to take Mahlobo and his Cabinet colleagues to task over their habit of lying to Parliament.  