The inquiry into the SABC board is expected to get under way today with the election of the chair of the ad hoc committee that will conduct the investigation. The committee decided to set up a parliamentary inquiry into the SABC board during a dramatic meeting of the portfolio committee on communication in October. During the meeting, two board members – Krish Naidoo and Vusi Mavusa – resigned, leaving the board with four members. The committee wrote to the remaining non-executive board members – Professor Obert Maguvhe (chairperson), Leah Khumalo (deputy chairperson), Nomvuyo Mhlakaza, and Dr Ndivhoniswani Tshidzumba – and asked them to resign. Khumalo resigned, but the other three refused to do so. Maguvhe, Mhlakaza and Tshidzumba wrote back to the committee and expressed their opposition to the investigation being handled by the portfolio committee because they believed they would be disadvantaged. Mhlakaza and Tshidzumba reportedly tendered their resignations this weekend. The ad hoc committee will be made up of 11 members of Parliament – six from the ANC, two from the Democratic Alliance, one from the Economic Freedom Fighters, and two from the other parties. The ANC will be represented by Vincent Smith, Jabulani Mahlangu, Makhosi Khoza (who was chairperson of the ad hoc committee that appointed the new Public Protector), Patrick Chauke, Fezeka Loliwe and Juli Killian. It is expected that Smith will be elected as chairperson. Phumzile van Damme, who also serves on the portfolio committee, and Mike Waters will represent the DA on the ad hoc committee, together with EFF chief whip Floyd Shivambu, Inkatha Freedom Party MP Liezl van der Merwe, who also serves on the portfolio committee, and National Freedom Party MP Munzoor Shaik Emam. EFF MP Mbuyiseni Ndlozi, NFP MP Professor Moses Khubisa, and United Democratic Movement MP Nqabayomzi Kwankwa are alternative members of the ad hoc committee. Smith was a member of the standing committee on public accounts from 1999 to 2004. He has also served as the chairperson for the standing committee on the Auditor-General from 2004 to 2009 and the chairperson for the ad hoc committee on the Auditor-General. The committee meets this week amid media reports that certain SABC staff members who formed part of the so-called SABC 8 – journalists Suna Venter, Foeta Krige, Busi Ntuli, Thandeka Gqubule, Jacques Steenkamp, Krivani Pillay, Lukhanyo Calata and Vuyo Mvoko – were being harassed, intimidated and targeted. The staff members were suspended – then subsequently reinstated after a Labour Court battle – after speaking out against the broadcaster’s policy to not show footage of violent protests. They have filed papers in the Constitutional Court to challenge a culture of censorship and fear in the SABC. *This article was updated on November 25 to reflect that two more board members had resigned.  