Due to a translation error from the original version of this story, the date of allocation of the Gazelles contract was erroneously indicated as having taken place after Dr Thami Mazwai's appointment to the department of small business development. In fact, the allocation took place eight months before he joined the department. Therefore, as he points out, he could not have influenced the allocation and did not. City Press apologises for any confusion or embarrassment which may have been caused.     The DA is demanding action after the small business development ministry paid R22 million to a company in which Lindiwe Zulu’s adviser owns 40% of the shares. The Democratic Alliance will write a letter to the minister, in which she will be asked to cancel Dr Thami Mazwai’s contract with her department immediately, or he must get rid of his shares in Mtiya Dynamics. This was revealed in replies to parliamentary questions from DA member of Parliament Toby Chance, who queried whether Mazwai had any shares in Mtiya Dynamics and how much the company was paid to supply the department’s National Gazelle programme, an acceleration programme that provides both financial and business support to small and medium enterprises with potential for growth in line with the National Development Plan. The goal is to offer each enterprise support so that it can be driven to its maximum potential. It includes a R1 million growth fund for equipment and capacity-building. In her department’s answer to Parliament, Zulu acknowledged that Mazwai owned 40% of Mtiya Dynamics’ shares. She also confirmed that the company was paid R22 million in the 2015-2016 financial year to implement the programme for the department. In reaction to the minister’s answers, Chance said that if Zulu didn’t act immediately, the DA would write to Auditor-General Kimi Makwetu to request that he investigate these activities. According to Chance, under Dr Mazwai’s direction Mtiya Dynamics developed what is now called the National Gazelles Programme and sold it to the department of trade and industry. “After the formation of the department of small business development in 2014, the programme was transferred to it.” Mazwai started working at the small business development department last year which, according to Chance, was a “lucrative contract”. “That was shortly after his company was also given the contract to manage the National Gazelles Programme.” In response, Mtiya Dynamics said: “Mtiya Dynamics was awarded the contract on April 16. Dr Mazwai joined Minister Zulu as adviser on December 1 2015. As the contract was awarded eight months before the appointment, and while Dr Mazwai was chairperson of Mtiya, he could not have influenced its award. Mtiya were the tenderers and he led the process. “In fact, Mtiya started negotiating with Seda and the department of trade and industry, then responsible for small business, in 2012. The process went on for three years, and included a peer review by experts appointed by the then department of trade and industry, to ensure it was up to required standards. Chance also alludes to this but strangely, he says the contract was awarded after Dr Mazwai's appointment.” According to Chance, government employees in DA-controlled departments, metros and municipalities are barred from doing business with the state. “Minister Zulu must demonstrate a similar level of probity in the management of her department,” he said. The reply lists the following amounts totalling R22 085 000 that was paid to Mtiya Dynamics: • R2 910 150 on programme set-up costs;• R2 355 738 on call for applications and adjudications;• R683 234 on promotion, marketing and branding;• R2 848 965 as a management fee;• R1 723 573 on inductions, capacitation and business report;• R948 302 on research and development;• R1 629 350 on project administration costs;• R1 930 000 on third tranche expenses;• R3 500 000 for capacitation costs;• R463 785 project costs; and• R3 091 900 in value added tax.  *This article was updated on June 7 2017.  Llewellyn Prince 09 November 2016 18:18 Minister of Small Business Development Lindiwe Zulu is offended that “every black person who wants to help the government is decried as corrupt”. This was Zulu’s reply to a question by Democratic Alliance member of Parliament Toby Chance in the National Assembly on Wednesday. Chance wanted to know if Zulu would end the contract of her adviser, Thami Mazwai, or cut ties with the company Mtiya Dynamics. Mazwai owns 40% of the company, which in the past financial year received R22 million from Zulu’s department for services rendered. Zulu was one of the ministers in the economic grouping who were replying orally to MPs’ questions on Thursday. Mtiya Dynamics runs the National Gazelles programme, which Mazwai developed for the department. The gazelles programme is a flagship support programme of the Small Enterprise Development Agency and the Department of Small Business Development. It aims to identify and support small and medium businesses with growth potential through a comprehensive range of business growth-oriented programmes, activities and partnerships. Zulu confirmed in a Parliamentary answer on Tuesday that her department paid Mtiya Dynamics R22  million in the 2015-2016 financial year to run and manage the programme. On Wednesday, she said that Mazwai had declared his conflict of interest. "He is already busy getting rid of his shares in the company. He is busy finalising it," Zulu said. She took the opportunity to lash out at the legacy of apartheid, which she said was still keeping small and medium enterprises out of the mainstream economy. The South African economy is still structured according to apartheid guidelines, she said, which made it very difficult for small- and medium enterprises to flourish. This was why she decided that Mazwai was the right person to promote this sector for our department. "I am convinced that he is not a beneficiary of the money we paid [to Mtiya Dynamics] to manage the Gazelle programme for us." Zulu was offended about the perception that “anyone who is black and wants to help the government is seen as corrupt”. “But I want to make it clear that we, as the government, will break down the apartheid structures in the economy,” she added.        