Poverty, unemployment and inequality – these are some of South Africa’s greatest challenges. But there is a way of beating them – together. This was the central message delivered by Minister in the Presidency for Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Jeff Radebe, who was the keynote speaker at the 14th annual national business awards last night. Echoing Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan, who delivered his mid-term budget speech in October, Radebe said these challenges could not be addressed by government in isolation. “We need strong partnerships in order to improve the living conditions of the people of South Africa.” This week is Global Entrepreneurship Week and Radebe emphasised the importance of raising a new generation of young people who would not be job seekers but job creators. “We need innovative young entrepreneurs who will play a significant role in the renewal of our economy. Any investment in young people contributes to building a strong foundation for the future of South Africa.” Radebe’s speech was particularly interesting given its relevance surrounding our current economic climate. His topic of discussion was the role of business in creating a stronger nation. Radebe mentioned the “positive spirit” that was reinforced by business awards ceremonies because they implied that there were “thriving business initiatives that have a potential to contribute significantly to our economic growth path”. Taking guests through the 2008 economic meltdown and its effects, Radebe said that the current climate demanded that government, business and the civil society work together to “advance the gains of our democracy over the past 22 years”. Reciting a proverb, Radebe said that inspiration could be drawn from South Africa’s people: “A single man, no matter how strong, cannot build a bridge across the river on his own.” These words echoed the sentiments echoed by Gordhan, after he recited a Pedi saying: “Ditau tsa hloka seboka di shitwa ke nare e hlotsa.” (Lions that fail to work as a team will struggle to bring down even a limping buffalo.) The National Development Plan was also a point of discussion, with Radebe saying that the plan was developed as a “blueprint for the creation of a more prosperous South Africa by 2030.” With a focus on unemployment and poverty, the NDP seems to be fast-tracking itself towards more inclusive growth. Between the 2014-2019 period, 14 outcomes have been prioritised in the current medium term strategic framework. “The NDP makes it abundantly clear that the achievement of economic transformation and inclusive growth will not result from a single intervention – it needs a wide range of stakeholders to be involved,” Radebe said. Tasked with the responsibility of ensuring that other governmental departments deliver on their mandates, Radebe said that his department served as the “custodian of service delivery” within government and that corruption and inefficiency compromises their “developmental initiatives” which “threatens to reverse the gains of our hard-earned democracy.” Radebe emphasised the role that businesses played in winning the war against corruption and that the economic standing of the country was directly proportional to the number of local successful businesses.  