The contributions of trade unions cannot be underestimated – the labour movement is defining the path to a better society. This was said by Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa, who addressed the national congress of the Federation of Trade Unions of South Africa in Boksburg today. “The privileged in our society must realise that for as long as a decent life remains the preserve of a few, their prosperity will be fleeting,” he said. “It is a testament to your commitment not only to advance the interests of your members, but to struggle tirelessly for a better and brighter future for all the people of South Africa,” he added. Ramaphosa spoke about the collective struggles that trade unions have had to endure over the years and the immense strides that have been made by the federation. The union, which was established in 1997, has more than 515 000 members which includes skilled and semi-skilled employees from both the public and private sector of the economy. “By placing the struggle for decent work at the centre of our national endeavour, Fedusa – and the labour movement at large – is defining the path to a better society,” Ramaphosa said. The deputy president emphasised the need for a collective movement towards the improved living standards of workers who “who toil in our mines, factories, farms and harbours”. “The privileged in our society must realise that for as long as a decent life remains the preserve of a few, their prosperity will be fleeting,” he said. 45% of South Africans have been searching for employment for three or more years, and as a result there is growing pressure on households to make ends meet. “We need decisive action to steer our country from despair to hope, from a narrative of lack to a story of opportunity, from a chronicle of deprivation to a testament of prosperity,” he said. Ramaphosa is not the first government official to acknowledge the role that a collective efforts plays in forging the path forward after similar cries have been coming from government to renew its faith in the economy. Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan and Minister in the Presidency for Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Jeff Radebe have both recently hammered home the message that these challenges could not be addressed by government in isolation. READ: Radebe and Gordhan sing the same tune “It is by working together with all our social partners we can grow our economy faster and employ more people. This congress is a testament to the role that Fedusa has to play in charting a new path for our country. “It is a testament to your commitment not only to advance the interests of your members, but to struggle tirelessly for a better and brighter future for all the people of South Africa,” he said. 