President Jacob Zuma has pleaded for unity in the country amid ongoing calls for him to step down. Zuma has come under pressure recently from even within the ANC as veterans joined civil society organisations including Save South Africa urged that he must resign following former Public Protector Thuli Madonsela’s state capture report, which implicated him and the controversial Gupta family. He made his pleas while addressing the National Council of Provinces during a sitting today at Abbotsford Christian Centre in East London, Eastern Cape, following week-long public hearings hosted by parliament and the provincial legislature. “South Africa is a great country and has great people. Our country has enormous potential and can be a real powerhouse of the continent and create a better life and prosperity for all. To achieve the country’s true potential, we need to spend less time on political squabbles, and dedicate more effort to working and building our country together,” Zuma said. “We have seen the value of working together, in collaboration between government, business and labour to reignite growth and avoid sovereign downgrade of our country,” he added. The president said the country remained a better place to live since the dawn of democracy in 1994. This was revealed by a recent report published by the South African Institute of Race Relations. He said the country needed the build on this achievement. Zuma proposed to submit a concrete plans to government on how it could better improve speedy delivery of services to communities following complaints made by public during the hearing over the bad state of services provided in schools, clinics and police stations among others. Members of the Economic Freedom Fighters left the chamber when Zuma took to the podium to make his address, saying they did not recognise him as the country’s president. Zuma was also booed when he entered the venue while ANC members in the public gallery and other dignitaries including members of Parliament and MECs sang revolutionary songs to welcome him. 