If you have trouble the first few times you try to understand financial statements, don’t worry – that’s normal. The more you read financial statements, the more comfortable you will become with the presentation, and the better able you will be to interpret what the statements are telling you. Most of the numbers in the financial statements don’t stand alone. Each integrated report will have numerous footnotes that amplify on the numbers – make sure you read these carefully. It’s also important to remember that to get a good feel for the company, you should look at it within a much larger framework. Some of the things you need to consider before you even approach the financial statements or integrated report include: When you are reading a company’s financial statements, remember that public companies produce two types of numbers: unaudited and audited. The three financial statements you are going to encounter are the income statement, the balance sheet and the cash flow statement. Here’s what you need to look for in each: 1. THE INCOME STATEMENT shows what the company generates in profits or losses during the reporting period, such as a quarter or year. Key information in the income statement includes: 2. THE BALANCE SHEET is a snapshot of the company’s assets, liabilities and shareholders’ equity on the last day of the reporting period. The left side of the balance sheet lists the assets, or what the company owns. The right side lists the liabilities, or what the company owes, and the shareholders’ equity, or the funds invested in the company and retained earnings. The two sides must balance, so the balance sheet format is assets equal liabilities plus shareholders’ equity (A = L + E). The balance sheet shows data from the two most recent years, which allows you to calculate changes from one year to another. Significant changes in any account must be examined and could be worth following up. Items on the balance sheet include: The balance sheet and income statement reflect the company’s performance under the accrual method (think of it as a way of keeping score.) But to get an accurate picture of the company, you need to know how it is handling its cash. 3. THE CASH FLOW STATEMENT shows how cash moved through the company over the year and lets you see if the company’s cash position increased or decreased. It presents data for the past three years. Key components of the cash flow statement are: The primary entry for operating activities is net income. Free cash refers to the cash that is left after a company maintains its productive capacity by doing things such as modernising plants by purchasing new equipment or buying another business. Free cash is obviously essential for a company’s ability to expand activities, pay down debt, etc. There is no one way to calculate free cash, although a common format involves subtracting capital expenditures from cash from operations. 