Johannesburg born musician Michael Chirwa also known as Stilo Magolide aka 2190/choc is gearing to showcase his talent by performing his new songs at The Griffin Sessions at Carfax in Newtown tomorrow. City Press had a chance to meet Stilo on Thursday at Father Coffee shop in Rosebank where he spoke excitedly about the line-up for the show organised by energy drink PowerPlay. Some of South Africa’s most loved hip-hop artists will be showcasing their fashion, music, dance, and art through graffiti. There will be live performances, which the organisers are hoping will be a drawcard for audiences. “It’s going to be a crazy event; everyone must expect a great and high-energy performance with me and other artists. They must just put on their comfortable shoes because it is going to be a lit performance trust me,” promised Stilo who is scheduled to also display his fashion choice. Asked whether he regarded himself one of the coolest rapper in South Africa, and what made him cool, Stilo said being real to himself and coming up with the coolest ideas in the rap game has resonated with his fans and admirers. “I love being creative in my work and giving my best to my supporters every time I get on stage or meet them on the streets,” he said. He has recently released his new single featuring Riky Rick called Shukumisa. “We are about to drop the music video soon.” He said that he was currently on a nationwide solo tour having just performed in Thohoyandou, in Limpopo, for the first time. “It was so nice and we doing all over the country,” he said. Stilo said his designer fashion style is inspired by everyday life and people he meets. “I look up to guys like Nigo a fashion designer from Japan, and Verbal who owns ambush in Japan. I like having my own look because being different matters more to me, especially when it comes to fashion,” said Stilo. Asked about his plans for next year, he said his debut album will be out in the first quarter of 2017. This will symbolise an evolution of his work from Chocolate to Stilo. “It’s going to be crazy dance; hip hop the sound is 2190 we can’t really give it a genre,” he said. When asked about the real story about 2190, he said it was his area code from his home in Rosettenville, Johannesburg. 