Questions were asked in Zimbabwe whether President Jacob Zuma has actually backed off from his earlier demands for a new plane, at least for now, after he used the presidential aircraft Inkwazi for a state visit to that country this week. Zuma used the trip to Zimbabwe to cool off after taking strain from the release of the Public Protector’s report on state capture. He did not show any stress in Zimbabwe, where he was treated to a red carpet reception and private lunch by his equally troubled counterpart, President Robert Mugabe. Zuma also used the occasion to portray his positive spirits amid the shenanigans at home, sticking to his prepared speech as he delivered his opening remarks. He arrived at the Harare International Airport on Thursday morning aboard Inkwazi after refusing to use it for months and putting pressure on the SA National Defence Force’s meagre budget to hire privately owned jets for his frequent international visits, including using the SAA on his recent visit to the UN. From the moment he stepped off the aircraft, Zuma was bubbly, smiling as he was greeted by one of Mugabe’s deputies, vice-president Phelekezela Mphoko, and introduced to other ministers and officials. Dressed in a greyish suit, white shirt and red tie with white dots, Zuma cracked jokes with most of the officials he was introduced to at the airport. “I still remember this face,” he retorted to most of the Zimbabwean ministers and delegates that lined up the red carpet to welcome him. “This way, Mr President,” Mphoko quipped as he showed Zuma to his waiting car, a black Toyota Land Cruiser with a flapping South African flag at the front. There was momentary confusion when Zuma wanted to enter this official vehicle using the right rear door, but he was directed to the left rear door and quickly whisked away. Zuma appeared to be in a rush during his stay in Harare and although he was jovial at the airport, he appeared taken aback and at one time clasped his forehead with both hands as deliberations at a Harare hotel where he was hosted continued. Zuma had time for a one-on-one meeting with Mugabe where they discussed trade, bilateral cooperation and other issues. In his remarks, the under-fire leader was diplomatic, choosing instead to focus on regional issues such as peace, the drought and poverty-reduction initiatives than developments back home. “As we talked one to one, we have taken very serious decisions. We want to see changes and it is our wish that we should work together to explore a variety of issues to deepen our cooperation,” Zuma told delegates to the Bi-national Commission’s inaugural session in Harare. The high table at the conference venue was swanky – white satin table cloth donned with yellow, red and white flowers and flags representing the two countries. Mugabe asked for more investment from South Africa and pledged that South African capital was safe in Zimbabwe, which is readying for the introduction of local bond notes to stem a crisis occasioned by a biting dollar crunch that has disrupted business and economic activity in the country. Zuma’s host, however, was not as diplomatic as the South African president. Mugabe said he was grateful Zuma was still in one piece, despite the woes he was facing back home. The release of the report on the capture of the state has opened a floodgate of criticism against the president for his role in the alleged abuse of office by being influenced by the Gupta family in making key ministerial and other appointments. “We are happy you came and we are happy you are still in one piece, in spite of what the papers are writing every day,” Mugabe, who spoke before Zuma, said. After the official discussions, Zuma was hosted for a private lunch bouquet by Mugabe where the two leaders were accompanied by ministers from both countries. But this was not before Zuma helped Mugabe down the staircase from the high table, clasping his right hand as he uneasily reached for the aisle to guide him amid close observation from alert-looking aides. Journalists were denied a photo opportunity of this moment. Mugabe, who turns 93 in February next year, has frequently travelled to the Far East amid claims and reports that he was seeking treatment. Analyst Takura Zhangazha told City Press that the meeting would have been significant in boosting relations and cooperation between the two countries, although the actual significance would be in the finalisation of trade and other pacts. “The meeting would have been significant in boosting bilateral relations and shows that the two countries have continued to maintain strong ties. Of course, the detail is in how the final agreements stemming from this will be economically beneficial to the people of Zimbabwe,” said Zhangazha. With calls for him to step down growing, Zuma probably flew back into a storm back home, where ANC veterans, the business community and other groupings were piling up the pressure on him. 