The ANC is hauling absent MPs over the coals, and has threatened those whose absence led to the Division of Revenue Amendment Bill not being approved by Parliament with disciplinary hearings. The hearings would take place “as soon as possible”, according to ANC chief whip Jackson Mthembu. He described the MPs’ behaviour as “disgraceful and downright disrespectful” and said their names would immediately be forwarded to the caucus disciplinary committee, which must formally charge each of these MPs and initiate a disciplinary hearing without delay. The disciplinary committee is constituted by five members and is chaired by Advocate Mathole Motshekga. Mthembu’s announcement came on the heels of the weekly ANC caucus meeting, in which this subject was the only point of discussion on the agenda. He described it as a big “disappointment” because this was the second failed attempt in ensuring a quorum of members to pass the bill due to ANC MPs’ absence from the House in the past two days. Mthembu said the caucus comprehensively reflected on the failure by the National Assembly to quorate to pass the crucial amendment bill. “The bill is critical to the government’s ability to continue fulfilling its service delivery obligations to South Africans, and Parliament’s delay in passing it means the allocation of revenue to various government departments will not occur as planned. “When parliamentarians dither on such critical decisions, the lives of ordinary South Africans are affected and the ability of the institution to improve the material conditions of the people is eroded. The failure to pass this type of draft legislation is a serious indictment on all parties in Parliament.” The ANC took full responsibility for this development. The last two sittings were declared three-line whip (compulsory attendance) sittings. Mthembu said that 209 MPs had individually confirmed attendance, so the party was confident the bill would be passed. The rest of the MPs – 40 – were granted leave of absence due to their Parliamentary and executive international commitments, committee oversight, ill health and critical personal matters. The National Assembly consists of 400 MPs, which meant that if half the MPs plus one (201) had voted there would be a quorum. Things were made worse the past two days because most opposition MPs walked out of the sittings when voting was taking place. In Wednesday’s vote, 194 MPs voted in favour of the bill, five against it, and 200 didn’t vote. The ANC was confident that the bill would be passed next Tuesday.    