It’s not the Santé hotel’s fault that it could not become a profitable business, said the Orion hotel group. The hotel – which is being auctioned next week – is on a big estate with homes that are owned by other owners. The levies that the hotel has to pay to homeowners’ associations are unfair and it supposedly has to pay for electricity that it is not using. The Santé hotel is the last of the asset management group Fidentia’s assets to be auctioned off. Fidentia has been under curatorship since 2007 and its boss J. Arthur Brown is serving a 15-year prison term as a result of fraud amounting to nearly R300 million. According to the latest curator’s report, Orion is battling to manage the hotel in a financially sustainable manner. “We don’t agree with that,” Franz Gmeiner, chief executive of Orion Hotels, said this week in a written response. The estate is also part of a bigger estate each with its own homeowner’s association. Gmeiner points out that the hotel is the only thing on the farm that generates an income. According to him the unfair levies are the main reason why the hotel’s business model has been “under pressure”, even from Brown’s time. Gmeiner said there was also an agreement that the spa suites, which are not owned by the hotel but by other owners, should be made available to the hotel to rent out. Because some owners live in the suites, this disadvantages the hotel. In addition there is a question about their electricity bill. The hotel, spa and the spa suites are all on one power bill, but Orion does not agree that it is using all the power is says it is. Gmeiner calls that an “unsolved mystery” and alleges that, somewhere, there is an electricity connection that is not connected to the right electricity meter and that electricity is being used from somewhere else on the estate or even on a surrounding farm. It is because of these issues and not because of Orion’s management that it is difficult to manage the hotel in a financially sustainable manner. According to George Papadakis, one of the curators, the Santé property was sold for about R117 million in 2004 and 2005. The spa is independently managed by Bakwena. The auction is at 12.30pm on December 1 at the One&Only hotel in the Waterfront in Cape Town. It is being auctioned by ClareMart. 