The wife of Orlando Pirates striker Tendai Ndoro is dragging the star player to maintenance court, demanding that he pay her R40 000 a month for the care of their eight-month-old son. Ndoro, sources close to Zinhle claim, apparently earns in the region of R150 000 a month. City Press has also learnt that Ndoro’s estranged wife is challenging him to undergo a paternity test because, she says, her husband seems to be hiding their son from the world – yet he poses on social media with his four-year-old son from his previous relationship. One of Zinhle’s confidantes told City Press this week that she was sick and tired of “shielding and protecting” Ndoro. “All this time, Zinhle has been protecting the father of her child, but she has had enough now. Ndoro must man up and do what is right for his son,” the confidante said. Ndoro’s ex-girlfriend, Ado Mohale, told City Press this week that Ndoro “never respected” Zinhle. “When I used to date him, he never told me that he was married. He lied and said he was friends with Zinhle,” Mohale said. Mohale said as far as she was concerned, Ndoro was being economical with the truth. “After I found out that he was with Zinhle, I decided to break up with him,” she said. Ndoro did not respond to requests for comment. Orlando Pirates administrative officer Floyd Mbele said: “I’m afraid you’re not getting hold of Ndoro, because he’s currently in camp he’s preparing for the game this evening. Further than that, I’m not allowed to comment on his personal matters.” Zinhle neither confirmed nor denied the allegations. All she would say before hanging up was: “I don’t comment about my private life in the papers. My private life has nothing to do with the papers.” Zinhle’s confidante told City Press that every month, she has had to “threaten” Ndoro in order for him to pay maintenance. Fed up, she has now decided to take the legal route. “Every month she has to remind him to support their son financially. He is the one who introduced Zinhle to a luxury lifestyle and he must pay what she is demanding,” she said. Sources close to the couple claim that the Zimbabwean international footballer left Zinhle when their son was two months old. “Ndoro is currently dating Patience Ndlovu and they are living together in a northern Johannesburg suburb,” the confidante said. Ndoro and Ndlovu’s relationship is no secret. In May, Ndoro attended the Premier Soccer League Awards with Ndlovu by his side. On the day of the event, Ndlovu called Ndoro her “husband” on live television. “Zinhle was shocked and upset when she saw them posing together for the first time,” said Zinhle’s friend. “Even though she knew that there was another woman in his life, the picture confirmed everything.” It’s not the first time Ndoro is making headlines for the wrong reasons. In August last year, Sunday Sun reported that there were three women in Ndoro’s life: Ndlovu, Mohale and Thembi Mntambo. The paper reported that each of these women was claiming that Ndoro was theirs, but it appears that Ndlovu is the woman who finally won Ndoro’s heart. Last month, Ndoro delighted Pirates fans after scoring two goals in his club’s first match of the 2016/17 season against Golden Arrows. 