The official opening of the Limpopo High Court today brings the country’s tally of high courts to 13. These include: 1. Eastern Cape High Court (Bhisho); 2. Free State High Court (Bloemfontein); 3. Western Cape High Court (Cape Town); 4. KwaZulu-Natal High Court (Durban); 5. Eastern Cape High Court (Grahamstown); 6. South Gauteng High Court (Johannesburg); 7. Northern Cape High Court (Kimberley); 8. KwaZulu-Natal High Court (Pietermaritzburg); 9. Eastern Cape High Court (Port Elizabeth); 10. North Gauteng High Court (Pretoria); 11. Eastern Cape High Court (Mthatha); 12. North West High Court, Mafikeng (Mmabatho); and 13. Limpopo High Court (Polokwane). In attendance at today’s opening in Polokwane was Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng and Justice Minister Michael Masutha.   “Limpopo becomes the eighth province to have a seat of a high court. The Mpumalanga seat of the high court is earmarked for completion in 2017. This is an important development as we mark the 20-year anniversary of our country’s democratic Constitution,” Masutha said at the opening. He said that the introduction of the Limpopo High Court meant that millions of people would no longer have to endure the costs of commuting to Pretoria for high court services. The high court building consists of two blocks. Block A is the high court building with six criminal courts and 11 civil courts. Block B houses the offices of the state attorney, National Prosecuting Authority, master of the high court, Legal Aid South Africa, the family advocate and the office of the chief justice’s provincial centre. President Jacob Zuma was originally meant to attend the opening of the court but he is travelling to Cuba to attend the funeral of Fidel Castro. “President Zuma has ordered that the national flag be flown at half-mast at all stations in South Africa on Tuesday on the date of the funeral of former President Castro. The national flag is flying at half-mast in the South African mission in Cuba until December 4,” said the presidency. The court’s building has been receiving praise on social media, with many admiring the beauty of the building. Limpopo high court!! pic.twitter.com/5zZUY75nSb  