While sexual harassment continues to be a common occurrence in the workplace, it is unfortunately also an issue that is not often addressed. And, although both men and women can experience sexual harassment in the work environment, it is usually women who fall victim to it. The fact that it often remains unreported means that organisations aren’t able to deal with the issue effectively, and risk not only reputational damage, but the loss of valuable talent. The reality is that, due to its sensitive nature, employees are too embarrassed or, in some cases, scared to report instances of sexual harassment. A common scenario is an employee in a senior position sexually harassing a more junior staff member, who then could feel they may lose their job if they report it. However, sexual harassment in the workplace is prohibited under the labour laws in South Africa, and there are many cases on record where individuals have been legally prosecuted after having been found guilty of sexually harassing a colleague. The Labour Relations Act contains a code of good practice on the handling of sexual harassment cases in the workplace that defines and gives ways of dealing with it. According to the code, sexual harassment comprises physical conduct, verbal conduct and, in some instances, non-verbal conduct, where the victim is harassed online, or via messages or images sent to their cellphone. Behaviours that constitute sexual harassment are those that make you feel uncomfortable, including: In many instances, perpetrators are dismissed. However, it depends very much on the route the victim opts to take when dealing with the harassment charge. Here, victims have the choice of dealing with the sexual harassment in an informal or formal way. Informal action Formal action When an employee opts to go the formal route, the organisation will need to follow the formal procedure contained in the code. Here the victim needs to be told: Ultimately, organisations that want to prevent instances of sexual harassment need to actively communicate the types of behaviour that constitute sexual harassment, as well as the recourse for victims and the consequences for perpetrators. It is often the case that employees are unaware their behaviour is inappropriate, and many careers and company reputations have been damaged as a result. Vittee is CEO of Quest Staffing Solutions 