DA leader Mmusi Maimane called on the police to launch a full investigation into criminal charges, which he laid against President Jacob Zuma at the Rosebank Police Station a few minutes ago. The charges were laid against the president in terms of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act. “The Democratic Alliance laid criminal charges against President Jacob Zuma, and his band of cronies, for their role in aiding, promoting and benefiting from the corrosive project of state capture in South Africa,” Maimane said outside the Rosebank Police Station today. In his affidavit, Maimane laid out potential offences against the president, that include: » General corruption; » Corrupt activities relating to contracts; » Contempt, conspiracy and inducement of another person to contravene the act; and » A failure to discharge the legal duty to report corruption transactions. The charges were laid after Zuma refused to answer Parliamentary written questions submitted by the DA pertaining to his role in state capture allegations. “We contend that the State of Capture report by former Public Protector Thuli Madonsela provides extensive prima facie evidence of corruption, undue influence and interference by President Zuma, members of the Gupta family and other actors – all to further their own personal interests at the expense of the South African people,” Maimane said. The DA has also called on the police to investigate “possible wrongdoing on behalf of the board members of Eskom, Mosebenzi Zwane, Salim Essa, Linda Mabaso, Malcolm Mabaso, Eric Wood, Kamal Singhala, Johannes Motseki, Pushpaveni Govender, Des van Rooyen, Duduzane Zuma and others”. “We cannot sit back while Zuma runs an oligarchy at the expense of our beautiful country. Jacob Zuma and his co-conspirators must now face the legal consequences of their alleged misconduct,” Maimane said. “While the president has a right to take the state capture report on review in a court of law, he cannot hide behind the law. Rather, he must face the law,” he said yesterday.  