ANC national executive committee (NEC) member Malusi Gigaba has fired a salvo at the party for allowing factional battles to cripple it. “It is difficult to defeat the counter-revolution when the ANC itself is so ideologically exposed and organisationally weak; ravaged by divisions by factions seeking power to be the ones at the helm of corruption, looting and patronage,” Gigaba said. The minister of home affairs was speaking to delegates at National Union of Mineworkers Youth Conference at St George’s Hotel in Tshwane this morning. Gigaba bemoaned the state of the ANC, which he said had allowed itself to fall prey to selfish ambitions and had lost its militant character. “To sacrifice the unity of the ANC at the altar of uncontrollable personal ambitions would amount to a dismal betrayal of our people that have belonged to and built this movement throughout the past century,” he said. The fierce factional battles have come under the spotlight in recent months. The alliance is in disarray, with its relations being at its worst yet as noticed by the national working committee’s report to the NEC recently. The NEC resolved in recent months to arrest factional battles ahead of next year’s succession race. The ANC Youth League has called for the race to be uncontested, but that is unlikely to happen as battle lines have already been drawn. Factions have rallied themselves around either Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa, who is enjoying support from the SA Communist Party and a number of Cosatu affiliates, or outgoing African Union chairperson Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, who is supported by the ANC Women’s League and the youth league, along with the so-called Premier League faction, which includes North West Premier Supra Mahumapelo, Mpumalanga Premier David Mabuza and Free State Premier Ace Magashule. “Nowadays, comrades have become so obsessed with their factions that they even believe the first allegation or lie made in the white media about fellow comrades without giving you the benefit of the doubt. They will then go on to crucify you on social media and in the court of public opinion as if you are the enemy yourself,” Gigaba said. “Sometimes, you wonder whether we indeed are still comrades or have just become people who know one another inconveniently, and conveniently belong to the same organisation, but have fundamentally different objectives.” Gigaba called for all those who loved the ANC to “close ranks” around the organisation. “The many different voices all speaking at cross-purposes must be muted – the guns must be silenced, and we must all sort out whatever our differences are internally,” he said. “The fact is that factions are a massive drain on the vision, integrity and prestige of the movement, and our collective challenge now is to defeat them and defeat them totally.” When asked if he would raise these issues at next week’s NEC sitting, Gigaba said he could not comment on matters relating to the party because he was not the secretary-general of the ANC. 