ANC KwaZulu-Natal provincial secretary Super Zuma has vowed to expel dissident ANC members of the party who had gone to court to try and have the outcome of last year’s elective provincial conference overturned. Zuma, who is one of the respondents in the application by Vryheid ANC members Lawrence Dube and other branch members who want the conference to be re-run, made the threat at the Pietermaritzburg High Court yesterday following a short court hearing. Zuma said that the province would move against ANC members who had “taken the movement to court” in defiance of a resolution of the ANC Mangaung national conference which empowered them to do so. “Anyone who takes the ANC to court, he or she should be expelled. As soon as this issue has been resolved we will take that action,” Zuma said. The branches had made an application to the court earlier this year, but the matter was taken off the roll while a second application had been made by the respondents, headed by Zuma and provincial chairperson Sihle Zikalala, to force the applicants to prove their allegations. The matter had been put back on the roll for today, but the parties subsequently agreed that the matter needed to stand down till the second application was hear. Judge Esther Steyn adjourned the application indefinitely in terms of the agreement between the legal teams for the ANC branches and those for the province. Zuma said the application was “a thing that is brought by people that are desperate”. “They have tried bypassing legal process. These are acts of desperation to stay in power at any cost,” Zuma said. S’thembiso Mshengu, a spokesperson for the dissident branches, said that they would be coming back to court once the supplementary application had been hear. Mshengu said that they had exhausted the ANC’s internal process in trying to resolve their concerns, and the sitting ANC leadership had made “no deliberate attempt” to bring us together. “We are ANC members in good standing. We can’t accept processes that are illegitimate. We want a rerun of the ANC conference and we want the process that run up to that rerun to be free and fair,” said Mshengu. A rerun, he said, would be an “ideal situation”. 