Vivas from the Economic Freedom Fighters benches, applause from the Democratic Alliance’s, but a deathly silence from the ANC benches. That was the reception that greeted Tourism Minister Derek Hanekom in the National Assembly on Tuesday. During this weekend’s ANC national executive committee meeting, Hanekom brought a motion of no confidence in President Jacob Zuma. This kicked off a marathon discussion session that finally ended in the ANC closing ranks around the president, aiming for unity rather than dividing the party. Hanekom barely took two steps into the house before Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly Lechesa Tsenoli told him to get out: “Out, out, out!” The National Assembly had already started voting for the Inspector-General of Intelligence and, according to the House rules, the doors had to be closed. Inkatha Freedom Party chief whip Narend Singh - with a smile - asked Tsenoli why he chased Hanekom out. “I expected such a question,” replied Tsenoli drily. The voting process had to be restarted, and Hanekom returned to cries of “Viva Hanekom! Viva!” from the EFF benches and applause from the DA MPs. There was no reaction from the ANC members. EFF MP Hlengiwe Hlophe jumped up and said Hanekom should bring his motion in the National Assembly. “It would be supported here.” Hanekom didn’t respond to the fuss. Later in the session, the name Hanekom could be heard from the EFF benches, with at least one reference to “the fearless Hanekom”. Minister of Health Aaron Motsoaledi, who allegedly supported Hanekom’s motion, was also present, but Thulas Nxesi and Naledi Pandor, whom it is believed also spoke out against Zuma, were absent. ANC chief whip Jackson Mthembu, who was allegedly also against Zuma in the marathon NEC meeting, was at his post and during the break before the second voting session cracked jokes with Home Affairs Minister Malusi Gigaba, who was reportedly one of the loudest voices in the Zuma camp. Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa played a game that looked like Scrabble on his tablet. At a media briefing in Gauteng, ANC secretary General Gwede Mantashe said that no vote was taken for Zuma to step down as the president of the country at the NEC meeting, with consensus instead being reached. “The fact that we have not asked the president to step aside means we affirm him as president of the republic,” Mantashe said at the briefing.     