Few people will dispute that the fast pace of 21st-century life is taxing. There are expectations and aspirations to do well at school, to move on to post-school studies that will eventually lead to a good career, all with hopes of growing in material wealth and social status. But on this idealised path of personal development lie many hidden obstacles to success: learning and studying under difficult circumstances such as poverty, an unsupportive home environment or crime in communities; taking care of family responsibilities; earning a decent income in a shrinking jobs market; negotiating a culture of violence and intolerance; and seeking a sense of belonging in a country – and world – that seems to be getting more divided and polarised by the day. No wonder then that people increasingly seek and explore tools to help them navigate and manage these stresses. One such tool, which has gained immense popularity in more than 150 countries in the past 35 years, is a set of simple, rhythmic breathing techniques to calm body and mind. More than 60 independent studies have found that these breathing methods reduce stress, depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder; enhance brain, hormone, immune and cardiovascular system function; and increase mental and physical wellbeing. The breathing techniques are taught by the Art of Living Foundation, one of the largest volunteer-based organisations in the world, which aims to promote peace through stress-reduction programmes. Recently, these methods were taken to schools, universities and workplaces across South Africa, and 21 other African countries, as part of the annual i Meditate Africa initiative to promote peace on the continent through the use of such “mindfulness” or “quiet-time” meditation practices. Sandrika Chetty, a third-year psychology student, is one of the volunteers for the campaign. She says the breathing practice has transformed her life, which is why she is so passionate to share her experiences of feeling peaceful and calm. “It’s an essential tool in helping individuals to deal with today’s challenges. As a student, I really benefited from making these techniques a daily practice – not only experiencing inner calm, but my concentration and even my academic performance improved.” She is not alone in making this observation. Nokubonga Mabaso, an analyst who works for one of South Africa’s biggest commercial banks, has been practising the breathing meditations since her student days. She noted a “marked improvement in my approach towards and the outcomes of my academics”. Likewise, Vukheta Mukhari, a civil engineering student, says the breathing methods calm his mind and therefore make him more focused in class, so he digests new information more easily. “I’ve found that my memory has improved, allowing me to spend less time studying and still getting good grades.” Their experiences resonate with research that showed that daily practitioners of the breathing techniques gain increased mental focus and a heightened awareness. Another study found that practitioners spend three times more time in deep restful stages of sleep. More significantly, perhaps, are the reported benefits for mental wellbeing. Anxiety and depression are not only symptoms of modern-day lifestyles, they are also silent effects of poverty – one of South Africa’s biggest challenges. Research found a 73% reduction in anxiety among participants who used the breathing meditations, while those with depression showed a 67% to 73% decrease in such affected mental health within one month. Studies also showed that impulsivity and addictive behaviours are reduced, and that emotional regulation, optimism and a sense of wellbeing and quality of life increase. These findings ring very true for daily practitioners like Simbulele Dlulane, who studied fashion design and now works for acclaimed fashion designer Gavin Rajah at his atelier in Cape Town. While she has been using the daily breathing practices only since April, she feels less angry, depressed and anxious, and able to act calmly. “I feel clear-minded; I have positive views towards life; I am in a happy space now.” Since Vukheta started the daily practice in 2015, it has been “by far the best year of my life – the intellectual and emotional growth I experienced has been exponential. I live each day with a strong, positive state of mind that allows me to achieve more and adapt to difficult circumstances.” Thabo Skotoyi, a busy 26-year-old freelance trainer and business coach who runs an after-school care project, says the daily quiet time helps him to think things through before taking action. “When I’m calm, I think better and I make better-informed decisions.” Research showed that the physical gains were impressive too. Several studies found that individuals’ heart rate and blood pressure dropped, and that biochemical markers of stress, such as cortisol – the “stress hormone” – reduced. Cholesterol levels of participants improved within three weeks with no change in diet, while the wellbeing hormone prolactin was found to increase by 33% from the very first session. Antioxidant enzymes, which protect from many diseases and rapid ageing, increase, as do the immune-cell counts of healthy individuals. No wonder then that Thabo testifies to being able to “keep up with the rest of the day with enough energy in everything that I do” and that Vukheta feels “energised in body and mind, which made me take up more responsibilities”. “It’s really powerful and helped me tackle things that I in the past would not do,” says Simbulele. “It helps you to be the best person you can be. And you don’t need to do anything – just breathe!” The Art of Living (artofliving.org) breathing techniques are taught at monthly courses at various locations throughout South Africa 