The heavy reliance on hiring private boats has been a financial burden to the Robben Island Museum, which has spent more than R44 million on rentals in the past financial year. The museum has been forced to rent boats after its main ferry, Sikhululekile, broke down. “The breaking down of the main ferry in December 2013 and the unreliability of the historic boats have continuously dealt a significant blow to the museum’s ability to generate sufficient revenue to carry out is programmes,” said the museum’s chief executive officer, Mava Dada, in the foreword of the museum’s annual report for 2015-2016, which was tabled in Parliament yesterday. A total of R38 million was spent on boat hire during the previous financial year. The museum has received approval from the City of Cape Town to source an expert boat broker to assist with the acquisition of a new vessel. “It is anticipated that a new vessel will be procured within the next 24 months. The anticipated cost is R100 million, which will be funded out of the museum’s retained surpluses. These surpluses arose as a result of operational efficiencies,” said Dada. However, boat rentals will remain part of the museum’s business for the short- to medium-term as backup for the museum’s boats that transport tourists to and from the island. Dada said “external boats” would always be required to provide additional capacity to ensure the reliability and consistency of ferry operations. For this reason, a year-long contract had been signed with ferry service providers, and museum management would be negotiating another three-to-five-year contract. According to the annual report, visits to the island have shown an upward curve on a year-on-year basis. Annual visitor numbers for the year was 364 021, an increase of 12% on the previous year. Dada attributed the increase to the availability of rental boats, which meant more tourists were visiting the island, said Dada. The council has prioritised the need for the museum to diversify its revenue, instead of relying on ticket sales alone.   