The University of Johannesburg has joined other universities by increasing its tuition and residence fees for 2017 by 8%. City Press reported yesterday that the University of The Free State, Rhodes University, Stellenbosch University, the North-West University and the University of the Witwatersrand had increased their fees by 8%. On Tuesday, UJ concluded its academic year with its final examinations. “About 12 500 students will graduate as scheduled and will continue to make meaningful contributions to their professions and vocations, and to society and the economy,” Herman Esterhuizen, media liaison of the university, said. The university council along with the student representative council reached an agreement not to increase the fees of students whose families earn less than R600 000, which comprises 75% of the students. “For the remaining 25% of the UJ student body whose family income is in excess of R600 000 a year, the council approved an 8% tuition and residence fee increase. The university will in due course announce the verification process to assess family income threshold levels,” Esterhuizen said. In addition to the increase, the university has in place several financial aid schemes to assist the “missing middle” students who cannot afford to pay their fees which include: » R20 million to the SRC Trust Fund, which will be used to assist around 5000 “missing middle” students with their first minimum payment, enabling them to register for 2017; » R25 million to top up the National Student Financial Aid Scheme funding which will fully fund the university studies of an additional 450 students in 2017; and » R13.2 million for the UJ subsidised meal assistance programme, which will ensure that 3850 students receive two balanced meals a day.  Earlier this year Fort Hare, Tshwane University of Technology, and the Cape Peninsula University of Technology announced 0% increases. The University of the Western Cape will have its meeting next Wednesday, with an announcement on the fees for 2017 expected on December 15.     