Mamelodi Sundowns coach Pitso Mosimane has emphasised that sticking to their style of play will be vital to overcome Japanese side Kashima Antlers in their opening Fifa Club World Cup match at Suita Stadium today. The match kicks off at 7.30pm (12.30pm SA time). This will be an interesting clash considering that both teams were making their maiden appearance at the tournament. Mosimane is the first South African coach to ever lead a PSL club to CAF Champions League glory, while his counterpart Masatada Ishii is the first Japanese coach to ever win the J League title with Kashima. Antlers booted out New Zealand side Auckland City 2-1 in the play-off match on Thursday to secure a date with the Brazilians. The winner will meet Colombian side Atletico Nacional in the semifinals on Wednesday at the same venue. Said Mosimane: “We first have to ensure that we play our own style that brought us where we are. There is no need for us not to believe in our game. "We respect our opponent, we have to try minimise their strength and maximise our strength. The Antlers have strong mentality. "They have a good fighting spirit and it was easy for us to see that in the two games they played to reach the finals (Antlers lost 1-0 to Urawa Reds at home in the first leg and beat them 2-1 to win the title on away goals) as they came back from behind. "When teams come back from a goal down it shows the mentality is good. They have a never-say-die attitude as they also came from behind against Auckland City.” Mosimane revealed that his players struggled to adjust to the time zone as Japan is seven hours ahead of South Africa. “We have been here for two days. It has been okay in terms of the hospitality and the training pitch,” said Mosimane. “It’s at the right standard and the right level as we expected. The only challenge we had is obviously the different time zone to come to the East. “Most of us struggled a little bit with jet lag, but slowly we are adjusting. Two players were still trying to adapt to the conditions, but the rest of the guys are okay and happy to be here.” Mosimane is aware that he has a huge responsibility on his shoulders as no team in Africa has ever won the Club World Cup. He went on: “We believe we have the right team to represent the continent. But this is not about me and it’s not about the club nor the country and our supporters, it’s about Africa. "That shows how big the responsibility is and also to try to see at this time how far Africa is compared to the world. We will try and do our best to give everything we have and if that is not good enough to win then we would say at least we gave the best we had.” On the other hand, Ishii revealed that he will change his formation in a bid to swing the game in their favour. “We have learnt from our previous match, so our playing style will be different. If need be I will change the players and the team will be more aggressive from the start to win the game,” said Ishii. Mosimane will rely heavily on the pace of CBD – Leonardo Castro, Khama Billiat and Keagan Dolly – to upset the home side that will pin their hopes on the shoulders of strikers Mu Kanazaki and Shibasaki Gaku to reach the semifinals. 