Bonisile Kayingo (42), Mziyanda Mata (24) and Luzuko Ngcokazi (22). These three dead inmates at one of South Africa’s most dangerous prisons were “willing to take the fight to whatever possible means” to escape the life they lived inside those cells. Allegations of gross misconduct and ill-treatment of inmates by warders have surfaced following the deaths and injuries in the clash at St Albans prison on Monday. The breakfast brawl resulted in three deaths and 26 injuries. Two inmates have given information on their daily life at St Albans, despite a “lockdown” at the prison. Families were turned away at the gates yesterday and told that visitation sessions were suspended until further notice. Police spokesperson, Captain Sandra van Rensburg, confirmed the names of the three dead prisoners. Speaking exclusively to City Press, an inmate, who asked not to be named for fear of victimisation, said Ngcokazi was sentenced for murder in 2013 and was serving an eight-year sentence. He said Ngcokazi had been serving at Kirkwood Maximum Security prison and recently transferred to St Albans, due to an offence he committed at Kirkwood a few months ago. “He had slapped a prison warder in a way that is identified as sexual misconduct, and they transferred him to St Albans,” said the inmate. “He was due for parole in February and now he has died in the fight on Monday,” he said. The inmate said Ngcokazi hailed from Uitenhage and was one of the inmates who were kept in the notorious Cell 23 at St Albans Prison. “The guys in the cell were fighting against the violation of their rights. They had been kept under lock and key without being allowed to leave their cells,” he said. Another inmate came forward with information on the living conditions of inmates at St Albans. He said the division in which they were currently housed was shut down in 2014 by a national team that was deployed to St Albans. “The national team arrived here to make assessments over a period of nine months. As soon as they left the local authorities reopened it,” he claimed. He said due to the unmanageable conditions within the prison cells, inmates were transferred to other prisons such as Mangaung and Kokstad. “After the closure of the affected sections, things calmed down, but the treatment from warders never changed,” he said. The inmate said they were subjected to unbearable insults during every contact session between inmates and guards. “Every day and night, when they come in to count us, they insult us with the worst insults. We are not happy with the kind of treatment,” he said. “All the inmates who stood up against the ill-treatment were sent packing to cell 23. If you go there, it means there will be no leaving the cell until you are removed.” He also confirmed that the prison warders refused to open up the cells for the inmates in cell 23. National Commissioner Zach Modise confirmed there was a complaint and said it had been resolved some time before the violence broke out. But the inmate said: “The five men who started the brawl went there prepared to die.” “They were willing to take the fight to whatever possible means, just to get out of the life we live inside these cells.” He claimed that the authorities denied the prisoners privileges such as hospital treatment for injuries and illnesses, exercise sessions and educational lessons – which are allowed. “When we ask to be taken to hospital, they give us the run around and tell us that we will leave our cells in a blanket, when we are gravely ill or when we have died,” he claimed. “If we ask to be included in education programmes, they tell us that we deliberately left school ... and chose prison life.” He also made reference to the case of a warder, Babini Nqakula, who was murdered in 2005 by an inmate. Disregard for the rules and regulations governing cavity searches appears to be just the tip of the iceberg of impunity exhibited by St Albans warders, State officials and members of the much-feared emergency security team also known as the “Taakmag”, Black Shirts or Ninjas. As a result, the current damages claim, which has dragged on for almost a year, has profound implications for South Africa, extending way beyond the narrow confines of the mostly deserted Port Elizabeth courtroom where the matter has been heard. Apart from fellow plaintiff Bradley McCallum’s successful attempts to prosecute a claim against South Africa for human rights violations at the United Nations Human Rights Council, details of the mass beatings and torture that occurred in St Albans mostly stayed in St Albans – until a story of brutal assault and violence was heard in court in 2014. Explaining the raison d’etre for the searches, which continued over the course of a week, prison head Siphosandile Mshunqane said: “The fact that Nqakula was stabbed with a new knife means there … was a breach of security…” This was according to a research article by Carolyn Raphaely, a journalist with the Wits Justice Project, which investigates miscarriages of justice and is a project of the journalism department of Wits University. The inmate said after the brawl died down on Monday, prison warders arrived at the section where the inmates who started the fight were housed (cell 33). “They came with weapons and assaulted about five of the remaining inmates. Later they removed them and we still don’t know where they took them,” he said. He said their removal made sense when the deputy minister and commissioners arrived on Tuesday. “They were covering their actions of abuse on those inmates.” Provincial commissioner for correctional services, Nkosinathi Breakfast, said the situation was now calm though tense. “We will continue with the lockdown until we are sure that it is safe to lift it, hopefully by the end of the weekend,” said Breakfast. 