Acclaimed young photographer Sipho Mpongo, the subject of a City Press investigation about the sexual assault of female students at the esteemed Michaelis art school at the University of Cape Town (UCT), this week made a threatening post on Facebook, going as far as to tag our reporter in a reply. On Monday night at about 9pm Mpongo wrote: “At UCT there were people [who] put me in a very compromising corner that I couldn’t even [tell] my side of the story. There were petitions to remove me [from] the university but they failed. There was a march about me but it also failed. There was a tribunal about me; it also failed. They tried [the] media about me; they also failed. And guess what? I’ve won and I am coming back for all those liars and I am a township thinker not a fake academic who uses people’s names to gain.” His reply to a friend about the post read: “First name is that punk Roger Young.”  In January this year City Press published Young’s investigation under the headline “How UCT’s system failed student after sexual harassment case”. Young had been alerted to a march by female art students against what they said was repeated sexual harassment and assault at the hands of a small group of male art students. One of the women laid a formal charge with the university. At the time the university’s media liaison Patricia Lucas denied it had failed the female student but noted the problem of sexual assault on campus. She said in a statement: “Mr Mpongo was charged under the UCT student code and found guilty of sexual harassment, sexual assault and interfering with the complainant in this case in such a way as to create an intimidating, hostile or demeaning environment ... “The university student disciplinary tribunal expelled Mr Mpongo but suspended the expulsion on two conditions: that he complete 65 hours of community service and that he does not commit [another] offence while a student at UCT.” Mpongo made the headlines again at the Durban International Film Festival in June when he starred as one of three young photographers in the opening-night film The Journeymen, a documentary that attracted both acclaim and hostility from critics. At the time he went public about his case – referring mostly only to sexual harassment, not all the charges on which he was found guilty. He said he wanted South African men to talk about the way they were treating women and suggested that how men are raised was the problem. The film lifted the festival’s best South African documentary award. Mpongo’s post was greeted with alarm this week. When City Press got hold of him he said he was in the former Transkei. Asked about the post he replied, also on Facebook, “My father is sick and I am focusing on that now.” When pressed about the post, he responded: “We can talk about this when I’m back to Cape Town. Right now I am in a different phase.” He confirmed he was returning to UCT to study in 2017. Asked if he was denying he was guilty of sexual assault, he said: “I am not in denial about my sexual harassment case in any matter.” Asked whether he was given the chance to tell his side of the story in City Press, he wrote: “I was and I am not fighting that. Just that my concern is that I was denied to talk or share my story long before I had a chance and people involved were talking about it, that bothered me for a long time.” In the end, when City Press asked about the post being read as a threat, with criminal implications, Mpongo backtracked and apologised. “I am coming to UCT and I am willing to engage with the matter within the university – it hasn’t been an easy thing to talk about it even within people I know, I felt silenced ... I apologise if my post made any threats that seem dangerous because that is not what I meant.” Asked for comment, UCT media liaison Elijah Moholola said: “The University of Cape Town notes that a Facebook post by one of our students may have been interpreted as a threat. This is a matter that should be brought to the attention of the country’s law enforcement for possible investigation. Should the matter be investigated and there be a case opened against the student, UCT will await the outcome of legal proceedings and then consider what internal steps to take – if necessary – in accordance with the university’s student code.” 