It’s been a busy time for house legend Black Coffee. He’s throwing a Block Party at FNB Stadium, is releasing a new EP, and has been working with Puff Daddy. Ntombizodwa Makhoba chats to Black Coffee, real name Nkosinathi Maphumulo ahead of his Block Party, to be held at FNB Stadium, Outer Fields on Saturday. His big event happens just two weeks ahead of his new five-track EP release.The legendary DJ also reveals to City Press that he‘s been working with American rapper and songwriter, Puff Daddy (real name Sean Combs) and that next year we must expect a full album from him. “I’ve been in studio with Puff Daddy during this past year so that’s a collaboration that fans can look forward to,” he says. On Saturday house fans will also witness a performance from Godfather, Oskido, alongside Metro FM’s Glen Lewis for the very first time. What should we expect on Saturday, are there any surprises? Aside from the all star line-up already announced, I’ll be bringing out some surprise guests for my set at the end of the night. Don’t want to ruin the surprise by saying exactly who, but it’s going to be one of those performances you wished you were there for. How many guests are you expecting? This year we’ve moved to the larger venue of FNB Stadium Outer Fields with an even more spectacular line-up of house and hip hop artists and bigger production. I don’t want to venture a number but tickets are flying at the moment. We are definitely confident that all the music fans in Jozi and the surrounding areas will be coming out in record numbers on Saturday to party with us. How did you choose the line-up? The line-up is an assembly of South Africa’s finest DJs and artists. Cassper Nyovest is such a crowd favourite and close friend I had to have him back this year. Alongside Riky Rick and Nasty C and the rest of the support cast for the genre that Block Party stage is guaranteed to be blazing. And on the house music side I’m thrilled to have the Godfather, Oskido, perform for the first time alongside return favourite Glen Lewis and our own insanely talented Soulistic music DJ and producer, Da Capo. Which artist is going to be an opening act on the day? American musician and bass player Michael Anthony. How would you sum up your 2016 in three words? Unforgettable, landmark and rewarding.     