Tears, sadness and laughter echoed around the Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban today, as hundreds of mourners braved the rain to pay their final respects to gospel singer S’fiso Ncwane. Ncwane, whos body was in a white coffin in front of the stage decorated with wreaths and flowers, succumbed to a kidney infection on Monday. The gospel star was laid to rest at Heroes Acre in Chesterville. Among the mourners arts and culture minister Nathi Mthethwa; agriculture, forestry and fisheries deputy minister Bheki Cele; ANC treasurer-general Zweli Mkhize and SABC’s Hlaudi Motsoeneng were spotted. Motsoeneng defended his controversial 90% local music decision at the funeral, saying forces who were trying to sabotage his plans will not succeed. “We will transform this industry and the country. Black people will own businesses. At SABC we’ll continue playing S’fiso’s music and will pay royalties so that his children are fed,” Motsoeneng said. Renowned South African actor Menzi Ngubane cried inconsolably after he shared some of his fond memories with Ncwane. Ngubane said he welcomed Ncwane when he arrived in Johannesburg in the early 2000s and the pair immediately took to each other. “We immediately connected,” Ngubane said. When Ncwane planned to record a gospel album, Ngubane said he continually motivated him. Eventually he recorded his album through Tshepo Nzimande. Such was the close friendship between the two that Ngubane gave Ncwane his suit to wear for his first album cover shoot. Durban mayor Zandile Gumede said Ncwane made his mistakes like any other human being, but always made the effort to self-correct. “He was humble and willing to be corrected. He loved peace. He fixed his mistakes before he passed on,” Gumede said. Gospel singer Sipho Makhabane, who spoke on behalf of SA musicians, said a hero had fallen. “We have lost a lot as musicians. We ask South Africans to pray for the young Ncwane family.” Artist Lungelo Gumede said he had an agreement with Ncwane that he will make a statue for him. “I used to tell him that I make statues of famous people and politicians. Ultimately I agreed but he passed on.” He unveiled the statue of Ncwane at the funeral. Musicians continued to entertain hundreds of Ncwane’s supporters while the funeral procession made its way to his last resting place in Chesterville. 