The ad hoc committee on the SABC has rightfully been hailed for the sterling work it has done to expose the rot at the SABC. As committee members tore in to Communications Minister Faith Muthambi on Wednesday, asking hard questions on why she had been unable to tackle all the problems at the public broadcaster, ANC members of Parliament in the committee were hardly distinguishable from opposition MPs. It was indeed the first time we had seen a member of the executive being grilled like that in Parliament. The committee did not brook any nonsense. Even when the SABC executives initially walked out of the committee, blatantly showing Parliament the middle finger, the committee stood firm until they returned. They held the same strict line for SABC board chairperson, Mbulaheni Maguvhe, who also tried to resist testifying but was eventually forced to. But what was truly remarkable was to see the chairperson of the committee, Vincent Smith, apologise to SABC staff or former staff members who were victims of Hlaudi Motsoeneng’s draconian abuse of power. The performance of the committee was in stark contrast to how such ad hoc committees had handled the Nkandla or the old arms deal debacles, for example. But I believe we are getting carried away if we want to start showering praises on the individual MPs who participated. They have been hailed as a breath of fresh air, indicative of new and different talent that still exists in the ANC. But I beg to differ. They are the same ANC MPs, acting from a new directive from new chief whip Jackson Mthembu. When Motsoeneng was ruling the roost in the past few years they were all MPs, although not necessarily sitting on the communications portfolio committee. Remember that only a few months ago Motsoeneng and Muthambi appeared before the SABC communications portfolio committee and, after some sweethearted exchanges, they were given a clean bill of health and allowed to go home. A parliamentary committee agreed with Muthambi then that there was nothing wrong with the SABC. They shared her view that it was only the evil media and opposition parties who were intent on making trouble. As she sang a different tune this week and said that the problems predated her arrival, none of the MPs pointed out that not so long ago she had denied the existence of any problems. So let’s remember to place everything in perspective. As we laud Smith, let’s remember that this was the same man instrumental in shutting down the controversial arms deal investigation years ago. Then, Smith replaced outspoken ANC MP Andrew Feinstein in the standing committee on public accounts as the party sought to smother the investigation. Political commentator Richard Calland says: “At the time, Smith told me privately that he had ‘a job to do for the executive’ and he intended to do it.” So as we pay tributes to accountability and democracy in action, let us make room for major surprises that might come when the committee resumes its work in the new year   