The 2016 news year in tweets. Here are City Press’s top tweets every month: January The year started off with a bang after Penny Sparrow’s racist Facebook post went viral. That and others. This was followed by the Democratic Alliance laying charges against Sparrow.  February On February 5, a mine shaft collapsed, trapping miners at the Lily Mine near Barberton in Mpumalanga. Economic Freedom Fighters leader Julius Malema continued to call out President Jacob Zuma on Nkandla, after calling for Zuma to publically apologise.  March In March a Constitutional Court hearing was held and was the point of conversation on social media for quite a while.  April In April, City Press broke the news that Ajay Gupta had boarded a plane at Lanseria airport for Dubai. He has not returned.  May “Please call me” inventor Nkosana Makate was involved with a 15-year-long legal battle with Vodacom. In May, the battle came to an end after the Constitutional Court ruled in his favour and Vodacom was ordered to pay Makate.  June The South African Music Awards were held in June, and the award for best male artist went to Nathi for his album Buyelekhaya.  July Former Acting SABC chief executive Jimi Matthews resigned, after having had enough of Hlaudi Motsoeneng.  August #RememberKhwezi protesters made an appearance at the Independent Electoral Commission as President Jacob Zuma was speaking.  September The nation mourned the death of kwaito star Mandoza.  October Students at the University of the Witwatersrand were injured after being attacked by the police on campus.  November In a series of WhatsApp messages, Sport and Recreation Minister Fikile Mbalula launched a scathing attack on ANC secretary-general (SG) Gwede Mantashe, labelling him a snitch and saying he could no longer be trusted because he colluded with the opposition.  December This month’s top tweet was about suspended National Police Commissioner Riah Phiyega being unfit to hold office and should be dismissed, according to a board of inquiry.     