Limpopo is home to three national parks – Mapungubwe National Park, which borders Botswana and Zimbabwe, and which is also a Unesco World Heritage Site; the Kruger National Park, which straddles the Vhembe and Mopani regions; and the Marakele National Park in the Waterberg region. All three contain the Big Five: lion, elephant, buffalo, rhino and leopard. Mapungubwe National Park and World Heritage Site Sip sundowners at the confluence of the legendary Limpopo and Shashe rivers, watch the eagles soar over Botswana and Zimbabwe’s skies, hear the echo of elephant calls, take a tree-top walk or just relax and absorb the surroundings. The Mapungubwe National Park is rich in biodiversity, scenic beauty and contains many archaeological treasures. Nearest airport:  Phalaborwa Driving distance from Johannesburg: Approximately six hours More information: sanparks.org/parks/mapungubwe/ Featured accommodation: Cottages at Leokwe Rest Camp This camp is located in spectacular sandstone hills. Close to the camp, guests can enjoy the treetop hide and the confluence view site and picnic area. The camp itself has a swimming pool and sundeck, as well as a central braai area. The cottages can accommodate two to four people and range from R1 175 to R1 865 per unit per night (these rates reflect the current prices and are subject to change). Bookings: Book online at sanparks.org to receive a 5% discount. Alternatively, contact SANParks central reservations on 012 428 9111 or email reservations@sanparks.org  Marakele National Park Contrasting majestic mountain landscapes, grass-clad hills and deep valleys characterise this park. All the large game species and an amazing variety of birds, including possibly the largest colony of endangered Cape vultures (more than 800 breeding pairs) in the world, have settled here. Look out for yellowwood and cedar trees, 5m-high cycads and tree ferns. Nearest Airport: OR Tambo International (Johannesburg) Driving distance from Johannesburg: Approximately three hours More information: sanparks.org/marakele/ Featured accommodation: Safari tents at Bontle Rest Camp It’s no coincidence that “bontle” means “beautiful” in Setswana. This pleasant rest camp consists of 10 tented units for those who would prefer a permanent structure rather than having to erect their own tent. The tented units offer two beds (stretchers can be added for children), a bathroom and a private verandah, and are self-catering with their own kitchen and outdoor braai stand. The tents can accommodate two to four people and are available for R1 235 per unit per night (these rates reflect the current prices). Bookings: Book online at sanparks.org to receive a 5% discount. Alternatively, contact SANParks central reservations on 012 428 9111 or email reservations@sanparks.org  Kruger National Park The Kruger National Park is one of Africa’s largest game reserves. Its high density of wild animals includes the Big Five. Hundreds of other mammals also make their homes here, as do diverse bird species such as vultures, eagles and storks. Mountains, bush plains and tropical forests are all part of the landscape. Featured accommodation: 1. Letaba Camp The idyllic Letaba main rest camp is situated on a sweeping bend of the Letaba River. The name means “river of sand” and the sandy riverbed is an excellent location for game viewing, particularly of elephants, which thrive in the area. Letaba is a green oasis in the surrounding mopane veld, and remains a firm favourite with visitors. At night, the owls, frogs, fruit bats, crickets and cicadas create a symphony of sound that complements the breathtaking expanse of stars. 2. Mopani Bush Camp On the banks of the Pioneer Dam lies a well-kept secret: a unique, tranquil and stylish rest camp nestled among the koppies with mopani trees and a huge gnarled old baobab tree in the heart of the camp. 3. Olifants Camp Guests who visit Olifants will be exposed to an unforgettable window into Africa. The camp is situated atop a hill that towers several hundred feet over the Olifants River. Views from the lookout platforms allow one to see the river below, just as a soaring eagle would see it. 4. Shingwedzi Camp Situated in the northern part of the Kruger National Park in the heart of mopane country, this camp offers visitors the chance to spot waterbuck, nyala, kudu and elephant. With a back-to-nature feel about it, this beautiful and rustic camp, which is untouched by modern technology, will leave a lasting impression. 5. Punda Maria Camp Punda Maria, a unique and small camp with a historical atmosphere, can be found in the northernmost part of the Kruger National Park in the Sandveld region, which is often portrayed as the botanical garden of Kruger. A variety of plants and wildlife are to be seen here and the area boasts some of the best birding in Kruger. Bookings: Contact SANParks central reservations by phone on 012 428 9111, fax 012 343 0905 or email reservations@sanparks.org Contact Travel Trade by phone on 012 426 5025, fax 012 343 2006 or email traveltrade@sanparks.org For more information, go to sanparks.org or sanparks.mobi BROUGHT TO YOU BY: LIMPOPO TOURISM AGENCY www.golimpopo.com 