Retired Constitutional Court Judge Zak Yacoob has accepted an apology from author John Matisonn after giving him a tongue-lashing for stereotyping blind people. This is the latest in a series of public exchanges between the judge and author over the festive season. Matisonn earned the ire of the respected judge after he penned an article about the crisis at the SABC and its former chairperson Professor Obert Maguvhe. “There is something fitting, in the Age of Zuma, about appointing a blind man to chair the one state enterprise for which sight is particularly useful – a television company,” wrote Matisonn in the Daily Maverick. In an open letter of response, Yacoob accused Matisonn of “unashamed ignorance and deeply rooted prejudice” despite the fact he was a broadcast regulator and “sophisticated writer and opinion maker”. Matisonn lacked an understanding of the role of the SABC chairperson and the nature of corporate governance. “As a blind person I am, like many other blind people I know, deeply upset and offended,” wrote Yacoob, who said Matisonn appeared convinced “that one needs to be able to watch TV to do this job”. “Matisonn assumes that any blind person will not be able to understand or comply with these strategic goals and obligations purely on account of blindness,” wrote Yacoob, who said his comment was “harmful and hurtful stereotyping”. Matisonn said on Tuesday that after seeing Yacoob’s response, he apologised immediately. “I had no problems apologising, my error was that I generalised,” he said, saying this did not detract from his criticism of Maguvhe, whom he said had done a great disservice to the SABC. “Zak Yacoob is not someone who would play his blindness. He is a genuinely admired jurist and he was offended. I am the cause and I regret it. I hurt him, and others.” In his written apology, Matisonn said he had been insensitive and the judge had taught him something. “I should not have written so inappropriately, and I apologise unreservedly to you and others who were offended.” He had “foolishly” cut out a paragraph from an earlier draft that referred to Yacoob “with admiration as one of our most important jurists to make the point that sightedness is not relevant in making appointments”. In an email to Matisonn, Yacoob wrote: “Thank you very much for your quick, warm and appropriate apology which I accept completely. “The problem is that society is full of this kind of prejudice and I expected a leading thinker to help cure our society. Your apology shows that you can be counted on to contribute to this transformative effort in the future,” said Yacoob, who is a former chair of the National Council for the Blind. The correspondence between the judge – who lost his sight at 16 months due to meningitis – and Matisonn triggered widespread reaction on social media. A few accused Matisonn – the author of God, Spies and Lies – of grovelling. However, most were congratulatory. “What a mature and respectful exchange between two giants in their respective fields. If only our national dialogue could be conducted at this level – what a great country we could become,” wrote author John Battersby. * Missed all the SABC drama? Catch up on City Press's investigation into the SABC here.    