In his final message for the year, President Jacob Zuma has called for economic transformation and nation key building next year. Zuma said that while 2016 had been a fruitful and productive year in which much ground was covered towards eradicating the effects of apartheid, 2017 needed to be a time for decisive action by all South Africans. “We have come to the conclusion of a fruitful and productive year. We moved a step further this year in fighting poverty, inequality and unemployment, as we continued working hard together, to reverse the legacy of apartheid colonialism,” Zuma said. He recognised the progress that was made in service delivery and the fight against hunger through public employment schemes and other programmes. “The year 2017 must be a decisive one for the country as we take the reconstruction and development programme forward,” he said. The president emphasised the need for job creation in order to “reignite economic growth” and that one of the key achievements of 2016 was the “collaboration between business, labour and government to support the economy”. He noted the significance of increasing the participation of “black people as owners and managers” within the economy. “Progress made on the achievement of this goal will greatly enhance the national reconciliation programme. Business, government and society must work together on this national imperative,” Zuma said. “We also need to make meaningful progress on the land reform and restitution programme in 2017, in line with the Constitution,” he said. Access to education and training, youth employment and economic opportunities are to remain key priorities. Zuma also highlighted the fight against racism, which has dominated news headlines throughout the year, in order to promote nation building. “Nation building and promoting social cohesion will need to elevate in 2017. One of the key tasks in this regard, should be a heightened fight against racism. All institutions and businesses must promote inclusion and non-racialism. Nobody must be excluded on the basis of colour or race, through subtle and unconstitutional means,” he said. Next year would mark two important centenaries, including that of late African National Congress president Oliver Tambo and the sinking of the ship Mendi, in which black soldiers died on February 21 1917. “The two centenaries must be used to unite all our people in appreciation of what the country has achieved against all odds, in building a new society from the ashes of apartheid colonialism,” Zuma said. The president said that despite the challenges which South Africans face, we must “continue to work together, to build the South Africa of our dreams as we are one people”. s the busy festive season slowly came to an end, Zuma thanked law enforcement agencies for ensuring order and peace during the holidays, as well all workers who have been working throughout the holidays. “We reiterate our call to all road users to obey the rules of the road. Irresponsible behaviour costs lives. We wish you all a happy, successful, productive and prosperous new year, 2017,” Zuma said.    