What would our be without scandals? Ntombizodwa Makhoba looks at the jaw-dropping scandals of 2016. No one will forget the incident that happened in September this year when internationally acclaimed DJ Black Coffee, real name Nkosinathi Maphumulo, slapped Tshiamo Letshwene, the manager of South African hip-hop artist AKA, in what has been reported as a misunderstanding at the DStv iRock Music Festival in Polokwane.  In a short video, which went viral on social media, Black Coffee was seen in an altercation with Letshwene, resulting in a slap landing on his face and his hat falling off.  According to reports, the feud began over AKA arriving two hours late for his performance while his band started doing their sound check during Black Coffee’s performance. This angered the DJ and led to an exchange of words and a physical dispute. A few days later, Maphumulo apologised publicly at Kong nightclub in Johannesburg where he had a gig. “I would like to say to you, I apologise, I’m truly sorry. I am not that guy,” he said  We all got the shock of our lives when the news broke that TV presenter Thembisa Mdoda lied about Atandwa Kani fathering her twins. Six months later, Kani broke his silence on his Facebook when he spoke for the first time about his relationship with Mdoda and him not being the biological father of her twins. He wrote: “In 2014 rumours surfaced that she had been unfaithful. Once the media caught wind of this story I decided, in order to protect the children and my family name, to deny the allegations and we threatened to sue the publication.” He explained in December last year he collected the blood test results from Lancet Laboratories and the results revealed that the probability of paternity was 0.000% and thus excluded him from being the biological father of the children.  Female employees accused the founder of publishing company Jozi Empire of sexually harassing them with phone calls, saucy texts and Facebook messages. One of his former employees, who asked not to be named to protect her identity, lodged a dispute with the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration and claimed that Ngavu had sexually harassed her. One of the text messages reads: “Baby girl in this life we living close legs don’t pay bills (sic).” A Facebook message states: “If you not willing to have sex with me then forget (sic).” A few weeks after City Press reported her story, another woman also came forward, saying that Ngavu had begged her to be his girlfriend. This woman also had a series of saucy message from him. In one of the messages Ngavu sent to her, he wrote: “I’m really tired of your lame excuses. If you don’t love me stop faking it and tell me.”  This year Joyce Omphemetse Molamu made headlines for all the wrong reasons when pictures of her in the nude were leaked. In the images, Molamu and her best friend Shirley Langa are in a bedroom displaying their private parts and holding glasses of champagne. In one of the pictures, a naked Molamu is shown taking selfies with her smartphone in the shower. But she blamed ex-boyfriend Mandla Makhubedu for stealing the pictures from her phone. “He asked to use my phone. That could have been when he sent himself the pictures,” she said. She didn’t deny of the existence of the pictures. “We were just having fun. How people have their private fun is their own business. The problem is when their private fun comes out in the public domain,” she said. “For the past five years I lived a clean life and was about to finish my studies. Then this happened,” she said. 