Nonfiction book of the year It is easy to be intimidated by Helen Zille’s Not Without a Fight: The Autobiography. It is big and heavy enough to crack open Hlaudi Motsoeneng’s skull. But don’t be frightened this book is what autobiographies and memoirs are supposed to be. It lays it all bare – from the family’s origins to the young girl’s pubescent adventures to her adult sexual adventures to the hurly burly of political life. Not Without a Fight is not a polite book, which is why it has peeved a lot of people in the Democratic Alliance and the broader political scene. If Mark Gevisser’s Thabo Mbeki: The Dream Deferred was the gold standard for biographies, this does it for autobiographies. – Mondli Makhanya The runners-up Equally heavy but less penetrable is The Thabo Mbeki I Know, a collection of essays about South Africa’s former president edited by Sifiso Mxolisi Ndlovu and Miranda Strydom. At nearly 600 pages, it would also assist in opening up Hlaudi’s skull. The essays range from the sycophantic to the insightful and all of them leave you better informed. For an understanding of one of Africa’s – and indeed the world’s – most influential leaders of the early 21st century, this book is precious. But don’t read it systematically from beginning to end. It is much more fun randomly hopping about, depending on your mood. Richard Calland’s Make or Break: How The Next Three Years will Shape South Africa’s Next Three Decades is another must. The analysis is accessible and erudite. The book is also bold and pleasantly unafraid in its prognosis, something that is so important in these confused times. For romantics like me who naively believed armed insurrection was an option for South Africa, Umkhonto we Sizwe: The ANC’s Armed Struggle by Thula Simpson is for you. Through the eyes and experiences of real soldiers and real commanders, former guerilla and now historian Simpson tells the story of the “people’s army” without over-glorifying its history and achievements. In this the time of flakes like Kebby Maphatsoe and Des van Rooyen, Simpson’s book restores the dignity of MK. – Mondli Makhanya Fiction book of the year South Africa’s spicy literary uncle, Zakes Mda, delivered a stunning read this year and Little Suns lifts our 2016 award. It tells the magnificently researched yet magical tale of Malangana, a desperate lover on an epic journey, and a cadre determined to decolonise the lives and land of the Mpondomise people from their British masters. As I wrote in my review: “Mda in Little Suns is a trickster who, by writing history, writes about the consequences of colonisation ... With a glint in his eye, he peppers his tale with lessons from history, and restores stories that were erased. Into this real life story of resistance, Mda weaves his love story as grandly as he did in Ways of Dying and The Whale Caller.” The runner-up I could tell from the minute I opened the pages to Carol Mashigo’s debut novel, The Yearning, that I would be getting lost in the words of a beautiful world sprinkled with the ideas of courage and self-discovery. I was not disappointed, and it should come as no surprise that The Yearning has been shortlisted for the 2016 Etisalat Prize. Her protagonist Marubini’s character is centred between memories of a childhood in Soweto and her empowered, present day life as a marketing executive in Cape Town – but the past is never where you thought you’d left it. – Avantika Seeth 