Parliament has not interpreted Advocate Thuli Madonsela’s non-attendance to a farewell event hosted by Speaker Baleka Mbete as a snub. The farewell was in honour and to thank former Public Protector Madonsela, former chairperson of the Human Rights Commission Lawrence Mushwana, former head of the Financial and Fiscal Commission Bongani Khumalo, and chairperson of the Commission for Gender Equality Mfanozelwe Shozi for their contributions during their terms in office in Chapter 9 institutions. Madonsela and Mushwana were absent and only a handful of guests attended the event in the dining hall of the Old Assembly. Despite their absence, deputy speaker Lechesa Tsenoli told City Press that they didn’t feel snubbed at all. “Things happen and we all are sometimes unable to attend commitments we undertook to attend,” he said. Tsenoli said the initial date scheduled for the farewell was November 16, but it had to be postponed because Madonsela couldn’t attend. Madonsela apparently indicated she would be overseas at the time. Tsenoli also said Madonsela was due to send a family representative to receive her gift. The Economic Freedom Fighters, who also didn’t attend the function, had previously tabled a motion asking the National Assembly to invite Madonsela to deliver a farewell address to MPs, but the ANC opposed this motion. Most of the other opposition parties supported the EFF’s motion to have Madonsela deliver a speech on the lessons she learnt during her term. “That place [the National Assembly] is only reserved for heads of government,” said Tsenoli. “It has always been like that and to change it would be a big thing. The motion was nothing but a political stunt by the EFF to back us into a corner,” he said. “That is why we have the old Assembly that is reserved for things like that. It is still Parliament and not less important than the [National Assembly] chamber.” He added “in no way do we expect it would be because of that, that she wouldn’t come.” Tsenoli said Parliament did everything it could to create a space for Madonsela to come and added: “We have also attended some of her events. There is really nothing to it. I suspect there will be a lot of political noise around her not being here, and people would want to create stuff.” Madonsela told City Press it was not true that she snubbed Parliament. “This date was first communicated towards the end of my term. Before my departure I indicated in writing that it was not possible.” Madonsela added a message to South Africans and Parliament. “Thank you for entrusting me with the power to work with a committed team to help the public exact accountability and justice in the exercise of state power. “It has been an epic journey. I trust our constitutional democracy is stronger because of the partnership for good governance we had.” Some opposition MPs were among the few guests who attended and included the Inkatha Freedom Party’s Mangosuthu Buthelezi and the Congress of the People’s Mosiuoa Lekota. ANC MP Thomas Bongo, who served on the portfolio committee on justice and correctional services and who regularly clashed with Madonsela, represented the committee at the event. Deputy Justice Minister John Jeffery, who earlier was also a MP in the justice committee, referred to “robust exchanges” over the years with the Public Protector. According to him oversight was always done thoroughly and they even had a face-off in court on occasion. “This is not necessarily a bad thing,” he said. “It is good for democracy”. Jeffery thanked the former heads of the institutions for their selfless commitment to South Africa. Mushwana’s absence followed his failed attempt at a second term as chairperson of the Human Rights Commission. Mushwana was shortlisted for interviews, but failed to make the cut.    