After pumping in money without seeing any value for it, mining magnate Patrice Motsepe’s investments in Sundowns finally paid dividends. Motsepe’s millions did not go to waste with two big titles to show for this year. In 2016, Sundowns not only reclaimed the Absa Premiership title, but also won the big fish – CAF Champions League title. Forget about what happened at the Fifa Club World Cup in Japan this week, Sundowns are still the team to beat on the continent. The Brazilians got a rude awakening in their maiden appearance at the club World Cup when they lost 2-0 and 4-1 to Kashima Antlers and Jeonbuk Hyundai Motors, respectively, to finish sixth in the tournament. This was an eye-opener and knowing Pitso Mosimane, he would want to have a go at it again very soon. With only the Champions of the continent representing the continent at this event, Mosimane has already taken aim at next year’s continental title. He finally delivered what the country has been searching for, for over 20 years – the CAF Champions League championship. It must be said, though, that Sundowns rode their luck and used their second life line effectively. After initially being knocked of the Champions League by AS Vita, Sundowns were reinstated and went straight into the group stages after the DRC side was disqualified for fielding an ineligible player. Not only that, Sundowns had already been knocked out of the CAF Confederation Cup, too, by Medeama Sporting Club of Ghana. But that is history now as they went on to lift the trophy after a faultless campaign in the group stages in which they won four of their five games – although their 2-0 win over ES Sétif did not count at the end after the Moroccan side was disqualified following crowd trouble in their game against Sundowns. It was clear from this point that the Brazilians meant business and were hungry for success. If there is any lesson to be learnt from Sundowns achievement is that club bosses must not be shy to spend. They cannot expect to reap the rewards if they do not invest appropriately. The Brazilians are now a force to be reckoned with on the continent. Five of their players have been nominated for the prestigious CAF Footballer of the year based on the continent. Khama Billiat, Keagan Dolly, Denis Onyango, Hlompho Kekana and Yanick Zakri have all made cut in the category. Not only that, Mosimane is also in line to win the CAF Coach of the year award with the club also vying to be the best on the continent. These are but some of the rewards that come with proper investment At the end of last season, Sundowns made a clean sweep at the PSL awards as they walked away with no less than four awards – coach of the season, goalkeeper of the season, player of the season and players’ player of the season – and deservedly so. Mosimane might have written his name in the history books, but wants more as the hunger to create his own legacy is still there. 