Lone ranger SABC board chairperson Mbulaheni Maguvhe has finally appeared before Parliament’s ad hoc committee looking into the public broadcaster. Maguvhe was summonsed on Friday last week after he and the SABC delegation walked out of the committee’s proceedings on the first day of the inquiry. He said afterwards that he felt “bullied” and his rights were undermined, a claim he repeated during yesterday’s proceedings. In response to questions by MPs, Maguvhe often claimed he could not remember or did not know what was happening at the broadcaster. Here are some of the quotes from his testimony: “I was convinced he was doing a sterling job.” – Maguvhe on the board’s decision to appoint Hlaudi Motsoeneng in July 2014 “I think he does get things right and I believe anyone, even if you are good at something, you might as well have challenges.” – On why appointing Motsoeneng was the right thing to do. ANC MP Makhosi Khoza responded: “I have established you and I don’t belong to the same world.” “The bonus that was paid, I’m aware of it, although the amount being said...I don’t have the figures.” – On Motsoeneng’s bonus for the SABC-MultiChoice deal. Maguvhe could not say whether it was between R11 million and R33 million as had been reported “Honestly speaking, I can’t remember, so I don’t want to even want to attempt to give a response which would not be the truth.” – His response when asked when the MultiChoice deal was agreed upon  “I give myself 8.” – When asked to rate his performance as board chairperson  “What I’ve done and I say this with pride, under my leadership, the number of qualifications we received from the Auditor-General were drastically reduced. To me, we have an SABC that was stable financially. We’ve achieved a lot under my leadership, but I cannot respond to issues of why you cannot dismiss me. That I do not have an answer to.” – Maguvhe’s response when asked why he should not be fired “I don’t think that most of the people who are there are loyal to the SABC itself. To give an example, you would discuss things and one minute later you get calls to verify a leak.” – Maguvhe on what is wrong at the SABC “The other thing that is not done correctly and I even joked to say even if I had powers, I would definitely chase everyone and employ new people because I think people do as they please here.” – Maguvhe’s solution to the current crisis at the SABC – hit the reset button “As I know, 85% of the money generated is commercially. 13% is TV licenses, the other 2% is grants.” – Maguvhe explains the money used to fund the public broadcaster 