The 33 inmates involved in the fracas at the overcrowded
St Albans Prison in Port Elizabeth were not searched, as they should have been,
before going to the dining hall. This was admitted by national commissioner of
correctional services, Zacharia Modise, during a prison visit yesterday. “The inmates were obviously not searched when they were
moved from cell 22 and 23, which house the most problematic inmates,” said
Modise during a visit to the prison on Tuesday. Modise said he is aware of a grievance between inmates
and wardens, which may have contributed to the fracas. “However, the matter was attended to and it shouldn’t
have been a basis of the fracas,” he said. “Prisoners approached the head of the prison, on their
dissatisfaction for the withdrawal of priviledges, resulting from their
placement into the affected cell sections,” “The placement was also not explained to the inmates,
approximately two inmates had been incorrectly placed,” he said. Modise said staff shortage also enabled the inmates to
implement on their plan successfully. The commissioner was part of a team that was accompanying
Deputy Minister of Correctional Service, Thabang Makwetla, following the fracas
which took place on Monday morning at the prison’s dining hall. Makwetla said St Albans is one of the Big Five
correctional facilities of the country that keep the most dangerous inmates. He said the prison has a capacity of 4000 inmates, but
currently housed 4387 sentenced inmates and many awaiting trial inmates. “St Albans
Correctional Facility is one of our Centres that houses +/- 5 000 inmates. This
facility falls within the category of what we refer to as the "Big
Five" of South Africa's Correctional Centres. "These include Pollsmoor,
Kgosi Mampuru II, Durban-Westville and Johannesburg Correctional Centre
otherwise known as Sun City,” said Makwetla. It is worth noting that based on numbers, these five (5)
centres present a variety of challenges in executing our constitutionally
enshrined mandate. He said the fracas took place at 10 am, where 33 inmates
from the two most problematic cells of the prison. “33 inmates attacked, without relenting, prison guards
who were serving them breakfast,” said Makwetla. “Resultantly, 3 died and 13 were injured, with 6
critically injured,” he said. “We have suspended all visits to the prison and are
currently in the process of informing families of those who are deceased.” Makwetla said the biggest challenges faced by prisons are
gang and over-crowding. Citing that though ideally inmates should be rehabilitated
during their stay in prisons, the challenge is dealing with the culture of gang
related activities. “We have the biggest challenges with gangs of 26, 27, 28
activities who have mind sets that determine that people should be murdered at
specific days of the month and years for gang promotion purposes,” said
Makwetla. He said no matter how much you try to rehabilitate them,
they believe in these cultural practices “It’s a socio cultural crisis that
goes beyond correctional services.” He said a formal internal inquiry which would bring more
light to the cause of the fracas. According to Emergency Medical Services Eastern Cape, the
prisoners, 21 in total, were transported to the various hospitals, following
the brawl. Sizwe Kupelo, provincial health spokesperson, said seven
inmates are still in hospital, under treatment at three hospitals; Dora Nginza,
Livingstone and Uitenhage Hospitals.