The government is finally taking action regarding the families of those who died in Marikana and the issues the mine workers had been fighting for when they were gunned down in 2012. Lonmin has been instructed to get a move on with housing for workers or face losing its mining licence, the government is ready to pay the victims of the Marikana massacre, and police officers involved in the massacre are being investigated. President Jacob Zuma said this yesterday after the Presidency released a nine-page update on the Farlam Commission’s recommendations. The update came four years after the disastrous events that transpired at Marikana during the strike action by Lonmin mine workers in August 2012. The commission was investigating the events in which 44 miners were killed when lethal force was used by the South African Police Service. The miners were trying to negotiate with Lonmin for better wages and housing. “Regarding the compensation for the Marikana victims, government is ready to pay. The SAPS has instructed its attorneys to make offers of payments in full settlements of claims for the claims where quantification were complete and not under criminal investigation,” Zuma said. In addition to the monetary compensation, which is still being finalised by lawyers, the department of mineral resources has been monitoring the progress on the living and housing conditions for the miners around Marikana. By December 2014, Lonmin had completed the conversion of all their hostels which include 776 family units and 1908 single apartments. Lonmin has built 225 bachelor units and 100 family units but these are yet to be occupied because the final touches are being completed. The allocation of these apartments will be done by January. “However, progress is slow, compelling the department to contemplate sterner measures. The department of mineral resources intends to take additional action. “A compliant housing plan will be requested from Lonmin, failing which immediate action in the form of suspension or cancellation of the mining right will be taken,” Zuma said. Ongoing investigations into the officers who were involved in the shootings of the miners have resulted in criminal cases being opened, which include charges ranging from attempted murder to defeating the ends of justice.  Marikana update by CityPress on Scribd