Ever wonder what draws City Press readers to Facebook? From Collen Maine’s mortgage to Tendai Ndoro’s maintenance case, this is the list of City Press’s top 10 Facebook posts for 2016. 1) Topping our list is the piece on ANC Youth League boss Collen Maine and his R140 000 a month bond. City Press readers were intrigued as to who was helping him out with that bond.  2) Police Minister Nathi Nhleko’s girlfriend, Nomcebo Mthembu, has allegedly scored more than R30 million for providing services that police ministry officials claim they could have received for free.  3) Who can forget when former President Kgalema Motlanthe said there is no place in democratic South Africa for obsolete apartheid laws – especially the Riotous Assemblies Act under which Julius Malema was charged. Our readers wanted to know why.  4) In November, a whopping 32 ANC MPs stayed away from the vote on the heated motion of no confidence in President Jacob Zuma.  5) In a series of WhatsApp messages to individuals loyal to President Jacob Zuma, coordinated by the president’s eldest son, Edward, Fikile Mbalula expressed how he had lost all respect for Gwede Mantashe.  6) Tendai Ndoro’s wife dragged the star player to maintenance court, demanding that he pay her R40 000 a month for the care of their eight-month-old son.  7) On the day that Des van Rooyen tried to protect his reputation in court, opposition MPs showed exactly how they perceived Van Rooyen’s reputation: A two-minute noodle, the Guptas’ most loyal servant and intellectually unsettled.  8) The Industrial Development Corporation will be making available R4.5 billion over the next three years to help tackle the “ticking time bomb” that is youth unemployment.  9) Controversial SABC chief operations officer Hlaudi Motsoeneng sat right behind Communications Minister Faith Muthambi, who just returned from a working trip to Mauritius, in Parliament.  10) “We fought for this country, and we cannot afford to see it washed down the drain just like this. I am a taxpayer and I do not like what I am seeing,” Tokyo Sexwale said. 