Politics, entertainment and a fight for free education – these are all at the top of the news list, and they are also in the City Press list of most-watched videos for the year. But there are a few surprises too ... The most watched video for 2016 was ... 1)‘One Patriarch, 10 Sjamboks’ To top the list, our readers seemed most interested in watching a number of topless protesting students at Wits University. They protested in solidarity with students protesting against rape culture at Rhodes University.  2) Ghosts of Zuma’s past The politics surrounding President Jacob Zuma and the allegations surrounding the rape of the woman known as Khwezi Khanga received both national and international attention. Four women protested silently in front of the podium as Zuma addressed the nation after the Independent Electoral Commission declared the 2016 municipal elections free and fair. The women were carrying placards saying “Khanga”, “10 yrs later” and “Remember Khwezi”, referring to Zuma’s rape trial.  3) Malema, The Master of the quote, does it again From his days as the ANC Youth League president, Julius Malema has grabbed the attention of the media and the nation as well as a healthy dose of controversy. From statements such as “shoot the boer” (he was found guilty of hate speech for that one) to “We are prepared to take up arms and kill for Zuma” to the infamous “go out, you bloody agent”.  4) Bonang Matheba: Never fight hate with hate Radio and TV personality Bonang ‘Queen B*’ Matheba sat down with City Press to talk about her appointment as one of Revlon’s global ambassadors, social media trolls and juggling all she does.  5) Violence erupts in Parliament as EFF MPs get carried away Will South Africa ever forget the day that Economic Freedom Fighters MPs were booted out of Parliament after they refused to listen to President Jacob Zuma?  6)‘Izikhothane is simply about your looks’ They might have made news headlines for burning money and spilling Ultra Mel custard, but Tshepo “Don Dada” Pitso (24) from Soweto told City Press that izikhothane (showmanship) is only about the fashion.  7) Happiness is a Four Letter slay This was one of the year’s most highly anticipated films and our readers loved this interview! The film adaptation of Nozizwe Jele’s award-winning debut novel Happiness Is a Four-letter Word opened in cinemas just in time for Valentine’s Day. Ahead of the premiere, Gugulethu Mhlungu chatted to the movie’s three leading ladies  8) #FeesMustFall: Violent clashes at universities The #FeesMustFall saga gripped the nation throughout they year. This video showed private security and police clashing with protesting students. Violence broke out at several universities after the 2017 fees announcement by Higher Education Minister Blade Nzimande.  9) Malema: There is no drug that will give you a better life Once again Economic Freedom Fighters leader Julius Malema made it to our top-10 list, this time while he was on the campaign trail.  10) Song for Sundowns Sundowns fans’ singing brought club president Patrice Motsepe to tears.  