Opposition MPs want National Assembly Speaker Baleka Mbete to apologise to a DA MP she ejected from a joint sitting two weeks ago. Mbete instructed DA MP Denise Robinson to leave the House after she refused to withdraw her comments which referred to an ANC leader called “JZ 783” during a debate on the 16 Days of Activism against women and child abuse. Mbete has since told a parliamentary committee investigating the matter that she in fact did not rule against the “JZ 783” remark but against Robinson’s comments which inferred that President Jacob Zuma, like murder-accused former ANC Youth League leader Patrick Wisani, has no respect for the rule of law. In her speech, Robinson spoke about Wisani who allegedly sjambokked his girlfriend Nosipho to death, and threatened and assaulted state witnesses. She said Wisani even joked that if he goes to prison, he would start an ANC branch there. “Does this show any respect for the rule of law? Perhaps he is just following the example of his leader, JZ 783.” ANC MP Bheki Radebe, rising on a point of order, objected to Robinson’s remarks saying she was using offensive language against “the people serving in this House, like the president”. After refusing to withdraw her statement or leaving as instructed by Mbete, Robinson ultimately walked out of the Chamber with the rest of the DA caucus. The party later laid a complaint about Mbete accusing her of suppressing free speech. In her report to a subcommittee of the rules committee, which is investigating the matter, Mbete wrote that Robinson had alleged Zuma doesn’t respect the rule of law. “She does this by drawing a direct link between a certain Mr Wisani’s abhorrent alleged conduct, to that of his leader, namely the president, who she claims has no respect for the rule of law.” “It is important to note that it is not the label ‘JZ 783’ itself that is derogatory. Even if the president’s title and name had been used or even if it were directed at any other member, the remark would still have been unacceptable because of the fact that the horrible behaviour of Mr Wisani towards his girlfriend and friends is ascribed in this instance to the president. “I believe that the rights of another member, including the president, must not be violated in this manner,” wrote Mbete. Mbete said contrary to Robinson’s perception, it was not the reference to “JZ 783” that was unparliamentary, it was the principle that a member should not be allowed to abuse his or her right to freedom of speech to simply infringe on the rights of others. “For these reasons, I found Mrs Robinson’s remark in reference to the president as offensive.” DA and EFF MPs have rejected Mbete’s explanation during a meeting of the subcommittee on Friday. DA MP Natasha Mazzone said Mbete made a wrong ruling in the House, but when she later conferred with her advisors, she realised that “JZ 783” was not a problem. DA’s deputy chief whip Michael Waters charged that Mbete erred and she has to withdraw her ruling and apologise to Robinson. This was supported by EFF MP Thembinkosi Rhawula who said Mbete’s ruling was narrow and subjective.  