Back in 2004 when Luzuko Jacobs first started working at Parliament, the Rule Book was wafer thin. Since then it has expanded significantly – a sign of the “exciting evolution” of the institution. Speaking at his office, Luzuko Jacobs, Parliament’s very own “Fixer”, sat back this week to reflect on close to thirteen years in the hot seat – first as media manager and later as spokesperson. He leaves the institution at the end of December to take up a position at Rhodes University and to complete his PhD in journalism and media studies. He has lost count of how many speakers, presiding officers and secretaries he worked under during his time at Parliament. It was a position that demanded everything of him. He describes it as gruelling, complex and complicated, but definitely worth it. “It was like an academy to me, there is no place like Parliament; it puts you to the test intellectually, spiritually and emotionally. It was definitely one of the most interesting times of my life.” He actually resigned back in 2011 already, but Max Sisulu, the speaker at the time, convinced him to stay on. For Jacobs, the highlight of the job was that every day was different. “You cannot arrive here with a pre-planned day. One email or one phone call and those plans are out of the window.” Amongst the highlights of his career at Parliament includes the ad hoc committee that is investigating the SABC, as well as the process of selecting the new Public Protector. “I will forever treasure it in terms of the way they defined the roles and responsibilities of Parliament. It will go down in history as some of the biggest highlights.” Lowlights include the labour issues last year which “hurt deeply” and which saw staff members preventing the sitting of the National Assembly and some parliamentary committees going ahead. “It was painful … the violence in the chamber, verbal and physical, those were the lowlights, but it happened.” There were quite a few positives for Jacobs in the fifth Parliament. “South Africans are more aware of Parliament. They are more interested in the business of Parliament – there is much more enthusiasm about Parliament than there was previously – especially amongst young people – than there was in the previous Parliament where things generally appeared very formalistic, staid and structured. Now there is an element of surprise in how Parliament operates. That heightens and deepens the excitement. “Look, it’s about the rules. The rules of Parliament are exciting. The rule book was quite thin compared to what we have now. That is an institutional response to things that are coming. That’s exciting. Political parties have deployed tactics and strategies that have livened up the institution across the board – not just one party. We have had an unprecedented number of motions; votes of no confidence, we have had so many debates ... “The whole change around the rules, including rules around attendance of MPs, is a package that has changed Parliament. It is not one political party, but all parties … how they sought to keep up with the times. “The new entrants did have big impact, but the old hands also came to the party and it was quite rewarding to see how those tactics and strategies was adapted and adjusted to suit the circumstances that prevailed at a particular time. I wouldn’t credit just one player for it. Any party, especially the big parties, lived up to the expectations. “I think this Parliament will never be the same again. I don’t think we will ever have a boring Parliament – if we ever had one. I don’t think that any political party will ever take lightly the quality of the representation that they need to have in Parliament and no party will ever take lightly the impact and influence of their representation in Parliament on their fortunes or misfortunes.” Jacobs avoided answering questions around more controversial matters that have dented the reputation of the institution. He believes there is room for improvement in how the media covers Parliament and that the focus should not always be on the “drama and spectacles”. He looks forward to spending more time with his family and to take up running again, but will miss the people and the adrenalin rush that Parliament brings.