Veteran Mamelodi Sundowns midfielder Teko Modise relishes the challenge of testing his skills amongst the best teams in the world. Modise still can't believe that he is representing the African continent in the Fifa Club World Cup that started on Thursday. Downs are the first South African club to play in the event. The former Orlando Pirates player’s career declined at some stage while others mocked him for his failure to lift trophies. But they are now eating humble pie as Modise has won two major trophies – the Absa Premiership title and the CAF Champions League. He is also competing against the best players in the world which proves that hard work pays off. Modise says it’s special to compete in such a big tournament. Sundowns start their mission with a date against J League winners Kashima Antlers in the second round of the competition at Suita City Stadium today at 7.30pm (12.30pm SA time). If Downs progress further in the competition they stand a chance of facing Spanish giants Real Madrid in the final and Modise could find himself involved in a tussle with Cristiano Ronaldo in the middle of the park. “This is a big one, especially for my club career, and to be among the teams that are the best in the world is every player’s dream,” said Modise. "This is an aspiration at Sundowns and it’s also a motivation for youngsters who want to go overseas. This is where I want to be.” Modise emphasised that youngsters like Keagan Dolly, Khama Billiat and Percy Tau should continue playing a similar style that saw them conquer the continent if they want to realise their dreams. He went on: “My advice to them is to play their normal game because they have been doing well for the team. "They don't have to do anything new, they don't have to be under pressure or feel like they need to carry the team through to the finals. "They just need to do what they are supposed to do and enjoy this moment. I mean you never know if this opportunity will come back or not. "They just need to grab the opportunity with both hands and you never know what will happen.” Modise stressed that his teammates will need to focus the entire match to avoid letting their fans down. “Every team is here because they are a good team. There is no small team here; as much as there is Real Madrid here, there are other teams that are big. We need to face this first before we think of meeting Real Madrid in the final.”