This reflection is not meant to canonise the Vodacom Durban July. The object is to locate its apparent popularity in the broader context of the unfolding crises of consumption and production, especially as it affects black people in South Africa. Borrowing from another evolving treatise on “Africa and the crises of consumption and production”, I argue that the Durban July, at a sub-national level, best represents the crises unfolding before us. In the contemporary moment, the Durban July demonstrates the internal logic of rampant capitalism characterised by conspicuous consumption and all the misdemeanours that accompany it. The whole razzmatazz is about consumption and flaunting. After all, what use will selfies at the racecourse be without its core utility – narcissistic self-promotion. Ask anyone who goes to that spectacle – at best, it represents five symbols of colonialism or Western modernity as referred to in popular parlance. * Beauty: although some among the attendees are generally not easy on the eye and wear nasty outfits, people still boast and parade “beauty”, much like the competing horses. Check in with the fashion police in the tabloid newsrooms and be the witness. The social scene has become a Dutch disease for our people, a curse of note. It has created space for us to exaggerate our notions of beauty and sexuality. * Sexual indiscretions: most of the post-mortems of the Durban July are about who slept with who, how I got the visa (permission from the spouse/partner), who was caught in the act, the new release, etc. Believe me, there’ll be no cliffhangers in Durban July stories without such sexual escapades. At least this is the talk of the town among macho, mobile money men, otherwise now known as blessers. * Liquor: what would the Durban July be without floods of waters of dizziness in VIP marquees, Florida Road, KwaMax, Eyadini, tashas and other venues of afterparties featuring copious consumption of single malts and French bubbly. You wouldn’t be serious about consolidating your brand position in the growing middle-class market without splashing out thousands on promoting single malt whiskies and French bubbly at this midwinter extravaganza. * Personality cults: these have become a feature of the Durban July. What would the event be without Mabheleni Ntuli, the original blesser; and Khanyi Mbau, the flag bearer of blessees? Pity that the organisers do not really recognise and reward the value of personalities who contribute vastly to the legend this event has become. Otherwise, we would now have a wall of fame for blessers and blessees whose iconography is built around mega-events like the Durban July, the Metro FM Music Awards and Cape Town’s J&B Met. * Patriarchy: everything about the event undermines the true value of women. They are objectified and reduced to beauty trophies for the enthralment of men who abuse their financial position to further patriarchy. Yes, we have a few paid models and waitresses, but the majority of women there fall prey to masculinity and capitalism. By the way, fellas, besides retailers, hotels and bottle stores scoring big, which horse won last year and what was the prize money? Ngcaweni is editor of the forthcoming books Sizonqoba: Outliving Aids in Southern Africa, and Nelson Mandela: Decolonial Ethics of Liberation and Servant Leadership 