Former ANC Veterans’ League president Sandi Sijake says since the ANC has been captured by so-called leaders who were not even in the organisation during the struggle, his vote will now go the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF). On the night of the elections manifesto launch of the political newcomers, Commander in Chief Julius Malema introduced Sijake as an honoured guest at a gala dinner held at Montecasino. This week Sijake told City Press he is now an EFF member and has lost all hope in the ANC. “The EFF are bringing about a certain measure of boldness, determination and non-conformity, which is necessary to bring about genuine liberation to South Africans – which the ANC has failed to do.” Last year City Press reported that the anti-apartheid stalwart had been notified by ANC secretary-general Gwede Mantashe that his ANC membership had been terminated as he had failed to pay a fee of R300 per sitting of the ANC’s national executive meeting, where he was an ex officio member. Sijake (72) maintains that, as a pensioner, he could not afford the fee and anyway, the termination of his membership had more to do with his speaking out against the ANC leadership. “I know that I could have taken the decision to court and have my membership reinstated but then I thought, there is nothing to go back to in the ANC,” he said. “There is a need there to redirect the struggle which we lost. If you see people like [EFF spokesperson] Mbuyiseni Ndlozi, that one is just like Duma Nokwe, who was one of the youngest, most brilliant lawyers of that time, who stood boldly and against ... apartheid.” When asked about Malema’s colourful past as the former president of the ANC Youth League, Sijake was most forgiving, blaming the organisation for creating that public persona of the current president of the EFF. “He was abused by ANC leadership, who wanted him to behave the way he ended up behaving in public. Because it was good for them, to serve their interests and also they used him in corrupt activities like tenders and other institutions. Not for himself alone but also for their families and their children, because he was bold and outspoken he could go and represent their families in acquiring tenders. “You need to ask yourself why all this time Malema never was taken to court until he was expelled from the ANC, because they were done using him.” Sijake says that the ANC’s downfall has been bought about by leaders who were not even in the ANC during the struggle, who joined only in the run-up to or after the 1994 elections. He includes Blade Nzimande and Mantashe. 