Evidence suggests that ANC Youth League president Collen Maine received a generous helping hand from the Gupta family to afford his swanky golf estate home ANC Youth League boss Collen Maine’s bond on his swanky golf estate home requires him to pay a whopping R140 000 a month. And while he refuses to say how he affords it, the evidence suggests the Guptas have lent a helping hand. Maine and his wife, Kelebogile, bought the R5.4 million property east of Pretoria last October, six weeks after he was elected league president. Maine has publicly defended the influential family a number of times – earning him the epithet “that Gupta-controlled Oros [man]” from Economic Freedom Fighters deputy leader Floyd Shivambu on Twitter. But he insisted this week he was independent of the Guptas. “I was dealing with those issues as a matter of principle, not that I have anything to do with them.” Maine’s double-storey, triple-garage home is set on a large, manicured erf in the Woodhill Residential Estate and Country Club. It backs on to the greens of an 18-hole championship golf course. The homeowners’ association board has included luminaries such as Gautrain boss Jack van der Merwe and Deloitte chief financial officer Chris Beukman. A person with direct knowledge of the sale, speaking on condition of anonymity, told amaBhungane this week that Maine had originally submitted a cash offer, meaning the purchase was not dependent on him raising a bond. A cash buyer usually has a limited period to come up with the money or a bank guarantee, well before the transfer is registered. In this instance, the source said, Pretoria lawyer Abdul Jaffer remitted the full R5.4 million, saying it came from the Bank of India. Jaffer has often acted for the Gupta family. Company registration records show he was the original director of a number of their companies, indicating that he helped to register them.  The Guptas asked Jaffer to help, he said, and the bond registration was done by a conveyancer known to Jaffer, Shamsoodeen Omar. Deeds
 office records confirm a Bank of India bond covering the full R5.4 
million purchase price was registered to Collen and Kelebogile Maine in 
mid-December, with Omar as conveyancer. Omar, who, according to deeds records, has done previous bond 
registrations for properties related to the Guptas, referred queries to 
Jaffer. This week Jaffer did not deny his firm’s involvement in the 
sale, but would not discuss details, citing client confidentiality. The Guptas have previously been involved in property purchases involving connected people, including:  The bond document, obtained by amaBhungane, raises questions about how Maine can afford his new house, because: In his former job as North West local government and human settlements MEC, Maine grossed a maximum of about R152 000 a month. His current ANC salary is likely to be considerably less. Kelebogile Maine’s current occupation could not be established before going to press. She previously worked for the National Youth Development Agency, where a former colleague said she left “late last year”. She did not take calls or reply to text requests for comment. This week, Collen Maine seemed to deny the four-year term of the bond, but would say no more. “I don’t know who is discussing those things with you. I have gone to the bank. I have got an agreement with the bank on how I pay the house for 20 years, so I would not then discuss my private issues in public any more. That’s my response,” he said. In February, Maine was quoted at a rally as saying that “an attack on the Guptas is an attack on the ANC”. After Deputy Finance Minister Mcebisi Jonas’ bombshell revelation in March that the Guptas offered him the finance minister’s job, Maine joined the countercharge, calling on Jonas to resign for ignoring ANC protocol. And last month, Maine visited Gupta companies after being invited to discuss the major banks’ closure of their company accounts. He was reportedly chased away by disaffected staff. Vinayakumar Singh, a director of Bank of India’s South African branch, would not discuss details this week, citing client confidentiality. But he said that, in South Africa, they operated mainly as a merchant bank and had granted only “two or three” home loans. He did not deny that the bank had a relationship with the Guptas, saying it was “not the only” bank in South Africa in that position. The Gupta family did not reply to detailed questions emailed to family and company spokespeople. The amaBhungane Centre for Investigative Journalism, an independent non-profit, produced this story. Like it? Be an amaB supporter, sign up for its newsletter or visit amaBhungane.co.za. 