Johannesburg - Premier Soccer League (PSL) clubs are expected to reaffirm their confidence in chairperson Irvin Khoza by electing him to yet another term in the hot seat next month. The National Soccer League (NSL) will hold its quadrennial general meeting on November 15 to elect the new leadership. A chairperson and seven-member executive committee will get the nod from the 32 PSL and National First Division clubs. Last week the NSL issued a circular to its members, reminding them to ensure they followed correct procedure when nominating candidates. The closing date for nominations is October 24. The circular letter reads, in part, that: . nomination forms for election to the executive committee will be submitted by member clubs to the auditor; . no nomination form will be valid, or accepted as such by the auditor, unless it is on an official member club letterhead and is signed by a member club official who is duly and specifically authorised on the membership form and is chairperson, president, chief executive officer or director, and is accepted in writing by the candidate. Khoza (68), who has been at the helm of the PSL since 2000, is likely to be elected unopposed for yet another four-year term. On Friday, he said he could not comment on the matter until the nominations had been submitted. A few clubs have stated that he is the only official who can take the league forward. A club chairperson told City Press the league would not be where it was without Khoza. “The league will die if he is not there. I do not see anyone opposing him because he is the best man for the job. Without him we would not be where we are,” said the club boss, who did not want to be identified. A club official said there would be jostling for position only among the seven executive members, but was quick to add that “there is no one who is ready to occupy that position for now”. “Whether we like it or not, [Khoza] is the best man for the job and we are happy with his leadership,” he said. Among other things, the PSL head has been credited for turning professional South African soccer around. As a result, the PSL ranks among the 10 richest football leagues in the world, and is number one on the continent. Khoza said he was looking forward to the quadrennial meeting: “It is rewarding to know that people acknowledge what we are doing on their behalf and show respect in return. They do so because we are transparent in what we do. “[For] anything that I do, I get the mandate from members. It is important to get ratification from them. “If you look at the executive, there are eight clubs represented, so we are physically involved in the situation. We understand the challenges directly.” But while he felt he had done well as chairperson over the years, Khoza said there was still a long way to go and many things still had to be achieved. “Whoever takes over must make sure we consolidate the utilisation of social media platforms. We need to maximise integrated social media platforms to attract more sponsors. We also need to position ourselves in terms of live streaming on mobile sets, as opposed to home television sets. “We have made financial assistance available to clubs to implement the compliance manual. People expect us to be professional, but there are still many challenges. “How do we get municipalities to assist clubs, given that these clubs utilise their stadiums? It is difficult to plan if you have limited resources.” Khoza’s dream was to see two PSL clubs contest the CAF Champions League final. “It would be good for Sundowns to win the league now, as it will reaffirm our league as the strongest on the continent. We need to realise our potential.” Excitement at the MultiChoice Diski Challenge had to be maintained, he added. 