Claims that police use excessive force on students at the University of the Witwatersrand yesterday have been referred to the Independent Police Investigative Directorate for investigation. The case was referred to the directorate following a statement made by #FeesMustFall leader Shaeera Kalla, who was allegedly shot 13 times in the back, at close range, by police who were using rubber bullets to disperse protesters. Police spokesperson Brigadier Sally de Beer said police officers visited Kalla in hospital where she was asked to give a statement. “The matter will be referred to the Independent Police Investigative Directorate for investigation. Any police officer found to have contravened the law will be dealt with accordingly,” De Beer said. She said members of the SAPS are once again called on to exercise maximum restraint and that they “wish the injured student a speedy recovery”. Kalla, a former Wits Student Representative Council president was marching with students on campus yesterday to rally more support for the call for free education, despite the university declaring that classes continue. “About 95% of all classes went ahead as scheduled across all campuses,” said Wits University’s spokesperson Shirona Patel. She said that protesters were trying to disrupt classes on West campus, where the shootings happened, and at the medical school. Protesters had also allegedly taken test papers away from students who were sitting in on a test in the Flower Hall on West campus and police fired rubber bullets and teargas to disperse them. “Protesting students entered Flower Hall and tore up test papers towards the end of a chemical engineering test. “They then made their way to the New Commerce Building where they disrupted lectures before making their way to the Science Stadium. “Police dispersed the protesting group using teargas, rubber bullets and stun grenades,” the university said. Four students and several others were injured by rubber bullets and were treated at the Campus Health and Wellness Centre. One student dislocated her leg while trying to run away from the danger. Kalla and another student leader, Busisiwe Seabe, were taken to hospital. Seabe was treated for teargas inhalation which severely affected her lungs. Patel said Kalla was shot nine times. Kalla had allegedly turned her back on police to face students in attempts to calm the situation. #ShaeeraKalla statement from her Facebook account.Busisiwe Seabe also in hospital, #Wits SRC says teargas severly affected her lungs pic.twitter.com/LHRDcnWk3O Student leader Catherine, getting oxygen after cops tear gassed them while they were peacefully marching. pic.twitter.com/MMEYxvA8X4 She will remain in hospital for treatment and recovery but has urged students across the country to continue the fight for free decolonised education. Wits indicated that security would be stepped up at lecture halls and test venues today. 