South Africa’s golfing legend Gary Player has paid tribute to fellow veteran Arnold Palmer, who died last week at the age of 87, saying he would miss the American dearly. Compatriot Jack Nicklaus, Player and Palmer made up the original Big Three – the irreplaceable trio that ushered golf into the modern era in the 20th century and lifted it to new heights of popularity. Nicknamed “The King”, Palmer won seven majors during his time – the US Masters (1958, 1960, 1962 and 1964), the US Open (1960) and the British Open (1961 and 1962). He also captured 62 titles on the PGA Tour. The three competed around the world, making golf one of the most popular and loved sports. But Palmer, after whom the Arnold Palmer Invitational on the PGA Tour is named, was arguably a cut above his peers thanks to his unique character. Every year in April, the Masters had the honour of Palmer hitting a tee shot off the first tee alongside Player and Nicklaus at the Augusta National Golf Club in Georgia in the US. He did not participate at this year’s event because he was unwell, but he was in attendance. “I have so many vivid memories of our time together competing around the world, with our families, helping each other’s charities, and just being together,” Player said this week. “Arnold was many things to many people, and he undoubtedly made golf more popular. But to me he was simply a dear friend for more than 60 years. “Of course, like anybody, we had our differences. But these never stood in the way of our relationship, and I will miss him terribly.” Player said although Palmer could be difficult and demanding, he was blessed with charisma, charm and patience. “He simply transcended the game of golf. He was inspirational to so many and lived life to the fullest,” Player said. “He had a slashing, dashing style accompanied by a knowing smile. He was loved by all, even when they did not know him. “He always made an effort, even when the odds were stacked against him.” Palmer, who won the PGA Lifetime Achievement award in 1998, also had an iced tea beverage named after him. He liked drinking iced tea with lemonade at home, and in 1960, at the US Open at the Cherry Hills Country Club in Denver, he ordered the non-alcoholic drink at the bar. A woman sitting nearby overheard him, and she ordered “that Palmer drink”, thus giving the beverage its new, famous name. * Palmer's memorial service was held in his hometown of Latrobe, Pennsylvania, on Tuesday. 