Dutch Council lifts suspension, but the SA National Accreditation System isn't happy The Dutch Accreditation Council (RvA) lifted the suspension of the South African Bureau of Standards’ (SABS) accreditation, but its accreditation woes are far from over. The SABS’ accreditation was suspended in March and the suspension was lifted onSeptember 21, Ingrid van de Braak, manager of the secretariat and facilities at the RvA, confirmed via email on Friday. But the South African National Accreditation System (Sanas) – the only national institution responsible for carrying out accreditation in respect of conformity assessment, as required by law – is also not happy with the SABS. On the Sanas website the company “SABS Commercial SOC Ltd” is indicated as suspended with the codes C01a-e and C03. This relates to commercial products and management system certification. Christi Warren, head of finance at Sanas, says the suspension means the SABS is not allowed to issue any new certificates that could give the impression that it is still accredited with Sanas. “It is the responsibility of the SABS to explain the consequences of the suspension to its clients.” Warren says the SABS still has to honour existing contracts with its certified clients and the suspension doesn’t render existing certificates invalid. Ian Plaatjes, SABS spokesperson, said the SABS disputed the decision by Sanas. He referred all questions about the suspension to Sanas for comment. Meanwhile, City Press’ sister publication Rapport also gathered that thousands of South African companies’ trade with and exports to Europe could have been adversely affected during the time that the SABS’ accreditation was suspended by the RvA. The RvA assesses standards authorities with regards to expertise, impartiality and independence before they are accredited and allowed to use the RvA’s accreditation stamp. Certificates and reports that bear this stamp are accepted in most countries and promote international trade, the RvA says on its website. The SABS suspension applied to its certification of food safety systems for, among other things, the processing of perishable animal and vegetable products and products with a long shelf life at ambient temperatures. According to RvA documents the accreditation for the Bureau’s certification of certain categories of food safety management systems and certification of occupational health and safety management systems was suspended as well. Plaatjes says the RvA’s executive council lifted the suspension after a wide-ranging and detailed re-evaluation was done of the SABS’ affairs. He says the RvA’s professional evaluation, findings and recommendations are valuable to the SABS. It has helped the Bureau remedy the deficiencies identified by the RvA and transform its business activities and give a better service to its clients. “The recommendations gave rise to the automatisation and digitalisation of the certification and accreditation division of the SABS.”