The big political stories of this week have so far been #FeesMustFall, and the SABC and Hlaudi Motsoeneng (who sees himself as a much bigger entity than the SABC itself). Frankly, none of these stories provided anything new. It was a case of the same old voices driving the same narrative, or new voices jumping on the bandwagon with a known narrative, or some old voices saying things that contradict what they said the last time (like Gwede Mantashe saying e-tolls punish the middle class and the ANC youth league demanding free education “now”). It was therefore refreshing when a story involving a post-municipal elections fallout in the DA landed on my desk. The DA has been dubbed the biggest winner in the August municipal elections so talk of any fallout immediately sounds like an oxymoron. Perhaps it is also because we have become accustomed to such stories mainly coming out of the ANC – conversely dubbed the biggest loser in the last polls. The story goes that a group of DA activists in Soweto West wants the political head of their constituency, MP Toby Chance, axed because he is out of touch with their aspirations. The activists sent a petition to the DA Johannesburg regional leasers, demanding that Chance’s fitness to lead the constituency be reviewed because “he does not use his networks and connections within party structures to empower his constituency through jobs [and] failed to assist aspirant entrepreneurs at his constituency”. They complained that only one candidate from their constituency, comprising 11 wards, has become a proportional representation councillor in the City of Johannesburg and that person may also not be deserving of the post because another candidate performed better in terms of election results in his ward. In the context where the DA has been lauded for wresting control of the City of Johannesburg from the ANC – as well as Tshwane and Nelson Mandela Bay metros – a lot of focus has been on the question of who stands to lose as a result of the change of guard. Countless stories have been written about skills audits and so forth. However, very little has been said about who stands to benefit, perhaps only limited to the appointment of members of the mayoral committees in the respective municipalities. And yet we all know that politics do not exist outside of business interests driving them from behind the scenes. The DA Soweto activists’ story challenges and asks questions about the very essence of political activism. Was all the hard work that the activists put in only meant to elevate one individual out of 11 wards to the top and the rest shall see in the next five years? If so, what are the guarantees within the very same political system that those who put in the hard work will be rewarded? Is it all a gamble where only the fittest survive? Having wooed disgruntled former ANC activists and supporters, the DA may not have time and space at its disposal. It has effectively introduced to its ranks a group of people who have become impatient with the slow pace of change in their own lives. The pressure to deliver on promises would be much higher. This may also be new terrain for the DA, which has, until the era of new leader Mmusi Maimane, frowned at the idea of focused investment in ground structures. Ideally, the DA would like people to vote for it based on what it says and if people do not like what it says then they could vote for another party (Thus its voters may not comprehend why some people would continue to vote for the ANC despite its glaring challenges). The introduction of ground structures and activists means that people invest their energy into the party and will expect some form of a return on investment. At an advanced level, ground activists become spiritual owners of the party and would rather seek to fight for their rights within the party instead of simply changing allegiances. At worst, such internal wrangles could see any party destabilised on the ground and consequently losing electoral support – like the ANC. For a party that has made jobs its prime elections campaign theme for some years, it is not surprising that DA activists would want to be on the frontline of beneficiaries. Under tough socioeconomic conditions the argument that a party governs for all and not only its members may gain very little traction. 