Parliament is keeping former Public Protector Thuli Madonsela’s report on state capture for safety despite a statement the institution issued late yesterday, saying it could not do so. This morning, Secretary to the National Assembly Masibulele Xaso told City Press that the report was in Speaker Baleka Mbete’s office under lock and will remain there until Monday when the new Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane assumes office. Xaso described as “unfortunate” the confusion created by the statement issued by Parliament last night stating that the Speaker cannot keep the report but would be returning it to the Office of the Public Protector. “We think it was misunderstood or not clear. The confusion was unfortunate,” he said. The statement said: “The Speaker has an obligation in terms of the Rules of the Assembly to table all documents received for the information of Members, in order to ensure that the business of the Assembly is conducted in an open and transparent manner. This report however cannot be handled in the same manner. “The report will accordingly be returned to the Office of the Public Protector.” Xaso told City Press that Madonsela had asked Mbete to “preserve it, keep it safe until my successor assumes office”. “We understand that to mean, when my successor assumes office, give it back to me. That’s what we are doing. “There was never any issue of saying: ‘Go back, we are not receiving you.’ “The report is here in Parliament; it has been received and kept safe. The Speaker will send the report back on Monday,” said Xaso. Meanwhile, ANC chief whip Jackson Mthembu revealed that he had a discussion with Mbete, regarding the purported decision to return the report and Mbete categorically distanced herself from “the grossly inaccurate statement” issued by the Parliamentary Communications Services as its contents neither represent her view nor her instruction to the staff of parliament on the matter. “The Speaker’s handling of the matter in this regard is appropriate and is accordingly fully supported and appreciated by us,” said Mthembu in an ANC statement. 