The Economic Freedom Fighters in Mpumalanga have questioned Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan’s compliment on the province’s finances after its irregular spending doubled to about R4 billion. Gordhan said yesterday that Mpumalanga was “well run” after a meeting with Premier David Mabuza and his cabinet. “What is commendable, is the premier’s pro-active approach that says we are now living in challenging economic environment, with no abundance of fiscal resources available, therefore we must live within our means. As a provincial government, we must undertake as many savings as we can. We must not put unnecessary pressure on the national fiscal,” Gordhan said. Gordhan’s comment came after the Auditor-General’s report, which indicated that the province’s departments had not improved in the 2015-2016 financial year. Mpumalanga EFF leader, Collen Sedibe, said Gordhan was not properly informed about the true state of affairs in the province. “We will secure a meeting with the minister and use the Auditor-General’s report to convince him to put the province under administration. It can’t be business as usual,” Sedibe said. “If the minister was here for political reasons, he must say so. A man of his calibre cannot say Mpumalanga is run well. His comment is suspicious and makes me doubt him,” he added. The audit outcomes of the province indicated that government leaders tolerated the flouting of supply chain management because they did not punish miscreants. This, according to the report, resulted in the irregular expenditure of R3.97 billion. The biggest contributors to the irregular expenditure were found to be the health (R1.919 billion), human settlements (R1.134 billion) and education (R355.8 million) departments. About 86% of the irregular expenditure was on contracts for hospital linen and food, pharmaceuticals, medical waste removals, RDP houses and the school nutrition programme. Mpumalanga irregular expenditure has increased over the past three years. In 2013-2014 it was R1 billion, and then rose to R2.4 billion in 2014-2015. Now it has doubled to R3.97 billion. Only three of the 18 provincial departments and parastatals – namely treasury, Mpumalanga Gaming Board and the cooperative governance and traditional affairs department – received clean audits. The Mpumalanga Economic Growth Agency and the Mpumalanga Liquor Authority received disclaimers, which means that auditors did not get documentary proof in order to form an opinion about their finances. Sedibe said the EFF would be laying charges following the auditor-general’s report. “We will open fraud and corruption charges against MECs and heads of departments. We are worried that the government is forever regressing,” he said. 