Despite running battles with the police, students protesting at the University of the Witwatersrand refused to back down today. At least two police cars were stoned and damaged in #FeesMustFall protests at the university. And at least 12 students were arrested at the University of Johannesburg’s Soweto campus. Two were arrested at Wits. Following the suspension of academic activities for two weeks at Wits, the institution opted to open its doors today, saying that if it did not the academic year would be in jeopardy. As classes got under way this morning, staff and students were advised to stay indoors. There has been no official communication saying classes have been stopped. The group began protesting at Wits at about 9am. They marched around campus in song, calling for those in class to join them. Students were warned by the institution yesterday that a full police and security contingent would be present on campus today and no large groupings would be allowed. #FeesMustFall #Wits situation now. Things are tense bit police seem to be waiting for outcome of negotiation pic.twitter.com/JTsPp2VYIe A group of concerned citizens including musician Simphiwe Dana, Wits professor Pumla Qgola and advocate Dali Mpofu (who is also the chairperson of the Economic Freedom Fighters) joined the protest in solidarity with students. Mpofu said that a contingent of lawyers was being arranged to deal with student arrests and other issues. The concerned group marched in front of students for protection as they walked up Yale road on the campus. Chaos broke out as police fired stun grenades. What followed was a pattern of the police firing rubber bullets and stun grenades, and students retreating and quickly regrouping. The firing stopped when female protesters walked towards police bare-breasted. #FeesMustFall #Wits some of the female protester's are now walking towards police bare chest with their arms in the air National police commissioner Kgomotso Phahlane was set to address the media at Wits. Students are currently in the streets of Braamfontein. Student protesters shut down a number of campuses nationwide as they called for free education following an announcement by Higher Education Minister Blade Nzimande that fees would increase next year but be capped at 8%. The poor and “missing middle” (those whose household income is less than 600 000 per annum) would have no increase and the government would cover the shortfall. 