A day after charging Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan for fraud, Shaun Abrahams raised temperatures in Parliament when he requested that a DA MP recuse herself from a parliamentary meeting. Abrahams is the national director of public prosecutions, and is leading the National Prosecuting Authority’s contingent that is appearing before the justice committee to account for the 2025-2016 financial year. But Abrahams wanted to first deal raise an objection to DA MP Glynnis Breytenbach’s presence in the meeting, saying he doesn’t whether the committee deals with such cases. “She is currently an accused person in a criminal matter that is at an advanced stage. I am not sure it is right for someone who is an accused person to be here,” said Abrahams. BREAKING:NDPP Shaun Abrahams objects to the presence of DA MP Glynnis Breytenbach in this portfolio committee meeting."She's an accused!" He added that he was astonished that Breytenbach was allowed to be part of the parliamentary panel that interviewed candidates for Public Protector. He requested that Breytenbach recuse herself. Committee chairperson, Mathole Motshekga (ANC) asked Breytenbach whether her “God-given conscience” allowed her to stay in the meeting. Motshekga said Breytenbach's presence could bring into question & blemish work of this committee over NPA."That's why we have conscience". “I am not going anywhere. One is innocent until proven guilty,” said Breytenbach. She said she was equally astonished by Abrahams mentioned the case, which was “sub judice and far from being at an advanced stage”. ANC MP Bongani Bongo suggested that the committee refer the matter to Speaker Baleka Mbete’s office for legal advice. Bongo said there seemed to be a conflict of interest because Breytenbach was facing charges which were directly linked to the NPA. Breytenbach, a former NPA prosecutor, is facing several charges, including fraud, perjury and defeating the ends of justice. The African Christian Democratic Party’s Steve Swart was the only MP who came to Breytenbach’s defence, saying conflict of interest would only come up if Breytenbach’s case came up. He reminded the committee that when Parliament voted on the fate of the Travelgate MPs, he objected to their participation in that vote, but he was overruled. ACDP's Steve Swart pointed out that the travelgate MPs participated in a vote to "clear" themselves. His objection to that was overruled.  