Activist Josina Machel, the daughter of South Africa’s former first lady Graca Machel and wife of former president Nelson Mandela, has been awarded the 2016 Trailbrazer Award in recognition of her activism against domestic violence and women abuse. The Saving Orphans through Healthcare and Outreach (SOHO) honoured her at the gala dinner at the Ritz Charles Hotel in Carmel, (a suburban city in Hamilton County) in Indiana, USA for being a “global change agent” who used her personal life experiences to address most pressing social issues such as violence against women and girls using media platforms such as newspapers, televisions, and social media. Wearing her most exquisite dress from Fred Eboka, she wrote on her Instagram account: “Today I shared the podium with a woman of substance @cecewinans at the SOHO gala dinner. She received the lifetime women of Substance award and I the Trailbrazer award. What an honour. I have a new friend.” Television personality, businesswoman, and philanthropist Basetsana “Bassie” Kumalo commented on Josina’s account saying: “Baby girl a warm and hearty congratulations to you. So well deserved. We must celebrate when you get back!” I am the 2016 Trailbrazer Award recipient, as a Global advocate for prevention and mitigation of violence against women and girls A photo posted by @josinazm on Oct 5, 2016 at 7:32am PDT Few weeks ago South Africa’s former first lady Graca and her daughter Josina recounted their horrific experience to City Press about the trauma she suffered in the hands of her abusive partner and that she was motivated to take action against gender-based violence by initiating an advocacy organisation, Kuhluka Movement. She set it up in order to “stand for all women across the world”. Kuhluka seeks to empower and engage thought leaders to take the responsibility to change the game on gender based-abuse. “The organisation focuses on building and improving shelters for survivors of domestic violence,” said Josina, adding that despite her ordeal, she thought that what happened to her was probably meant to help her “understand exactly what other women are going through and do something about it”. Her story symbolises the impact of 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children is an international awareness-raising campaign. It takes place every year from 25 November (International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women) to 10 December (International Human Rights Day). Josina said that by speaking out about her experience and working with organisations already active in the field, she hoped to “be a reference and inspiration to women to be able to come out, to tell their stories, and to take their stories to court”. As a young woman she was taking a stand to help other women across the country by coming up with ideas that will help those who are experiencing abused. SOHO selects candidates with international impact through their contributions, who have helped to improve the lives of people marginalised by poverty, disease, ethnic or gender discrimination and who stand for equality for women and girls in society. SOHO’s focus is on youth, uplifting and playing positive international role models through addressing social issues. The organisation has honoured the likes of 2009 World Food Prize Laurete, Dr. Gebisa Ejeta; entrepreneur Wendy Luhabe; author and advocate for trafficking victims Gail Masondo; Founder of Mustard Seed Africa, Gail Mawocha; and Idaho Senator Dr. Cherie Buckner Webb. SOHO described Josina Machel’s Kuhluka Movement - a non-profit civil society mass organisation directed at combating the violation of rights of women – as “bridging the gap between giving a voice to women survivors through education and rehabilitation, whilst providing them with a safe haven in their time of need”. “Through this initiative, Kuhluka seeks to find a platform that prevents abuse of women by bringing custodians of culture together to find ways that interrogate harmful practices & traditions, and questions the behaviours that foster an environment that tolerates violence towards women.” “It is voice of the voiceless aimed at protecting all citizens who are abused and not being heard. Her work is so inspiring and it is a legacy that will help others who went through the same experience of being oppressed and undermined because they are women,” reads SOHO’s tribute. 