On Sunday the country went to bed with the sad news that Fezikile Kuzwayo – known as Khwezi – had died. The death of the woman who accused President Jacob Zuma of rape 10 years ago, and was made to suffer for having the courage to take the matter through the criminal justice system, was expected to be one of the dominant stories of the week. The outpouring of grief and pouring in of salutations were accompanied by the inevitable re-running of the trial. Zuma was hauled into a virtual court by not only the chunk of the population who had reluctantly accepted Judge Willem van der Merwe’s acquittal verdict in 2006, but also by those who seemed to happily accept it at the time.  With Zuma’s popularity at an all-time low and resentment of his leadership at an all-time high, the passing of Kuzwayo served as a reminder of the slime in which the president is permanently coated. The trial was re-run on radio, social media, newspapers and television with the verdicts coming back as Zuma being guilty of wrecking the life of a young woman whose life held promise. But then we were distracted by the worsening crisis at universities. On Monday, the violence that had been confined to campuses spilled out on to the streets of Johannesburg. There was looting, the torching of a bus, the shooting of a Catholic priest and general mayhem.  Images from universities around the country and the uncompromising language of some of the parties indicated that crisis was becoming even more intractable. This was now the story of the week. Before the day was out we learnt that the standoff between Zuma and the Public Protector on the state capture probe was getting uglier. The dramatic final week of Thuli Madonsela’s term was set to be the story of the week. Then came Tuesday. A man who resembled puppet Chester Missing went on air and told the nation that he would be charging Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan, and former South African Revenue bosses Oupa Magashula and Ivan Pillay with fraud. During the course of the press conference it turned out that this was no Chester Missing and this was no comedy skit. The man speaking to South Africa was National Prosecuting Authority head Shaun Abrahams, who is fighting tooth and nail to prevent his prosecutors from taking Zuma to court on very serious charges of fraud, corruption and racketeering.  But this was a case that Abrahams was prepared to use to show that he was in fact a human with skin and bones and not a puppet. “The days of disrespecting the NPA are over. The days of not holding senior government officials accountable are over,” said Abrahams. This meant that the students could have a least a few days to engage in the sport of burning libraries and hosing down computer labs without any nosy media cramping their style. This was now the big story of the week. It will take a hurricane to displace this story from its perch. Such are the implications of what has been described as a suicidal act. Gordhan had just returned from a foreign excursion during which he confidently told those who control global markets that South Africa had turned the corner and “the worst is over”. “We are going through a difficult economic patch but we may well have bottomed out,” he had told a gathering of investors in London.  It is a message he carried through to the United States where he met the knights of finance, whose jitters about post 9/12 South Africa were gradually receding. At the World Bank and International Monetary Fund meetings he sang the same song. It seemed that by the time he had finished his medium-term budget on October 26, we would have probably successfully fought off the possibility of a late-year downgrade. Then Abrahams, no doubt acting on behalf of his ventriloquist who was pulling the strings from some east African capital where he was safely ensconced while the country shook, shattered all that. Who in the world will ever believe anything that anyone says about South Africa’s trajectory. The story carried through Wednesday as Abrahams and Hawks head Berning Ntlemeza held fast that they were doing the nation a favour by condemning us to the certainty of junk status. “I’m just doing my job without fear, favour or being influenced by any person,” Ntlemeza told MPs. Today is Thursday. Can this country please stand still for a bit while we get our balance?