Cabinet has affirmed its support for Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan who is facing fraud charges, saying that under Section 35 of the Constitution, Gordhan is innocent until proven otherwise by a court of law. In the meantime President Jacob Zuma has included Gordhan and three other ministers – Lindiwe Sisulu, Faith Muthambi and Bathabile Dlamini to the inter-ministerial task team that is tasked with “normalising the situation at higher education institutions across South Africa”. Zuma was criticised for leaving Gordhan out of the team. Minister in the Presidency Jeff Radebe announced this morning that the Cabinet remained confident in the country’s criminal justice system and the fair and just judicial processes that have defined our democratic era. “These processes must be allowed to take their course,” he said. “We never discussed the charges. It is not the prerogative of the government to discuss charges of any manner. What was being said by the Cabinet was the principle that is in our Constitution to support our colleague during this time.” He said the Cabinet also did not discuss the declaratory order that was being sought by Gordhan against the Gupta family and businesses, but that any minister had a right to legal clarity in a court of law. The Cabinet was unanimous in its support for Gordhan, despite individual ministers’ previous utterances, said Radebe. He said Gordhan was brought in, in view of the interactions that the higher education ministerial task team had with various stakeholders and reports that had been made to the president as well as the Cabinet. “The minister of finance is part of those who have been added to the task team because of some of the issues that arose. There are various proposals that various constituencies were bringing forward which make specific reference to the minister of finance that required his attendance in the committee,” said Radebe. But the inter-ministerial committee had been consulting with Gordhan in any case, despite him not being in the task team. Meanwhile, Radebe seemed to contradict his Cabinet colleague – Higher Education Minister Blade Nzimande – by saying he was not aware of a third force behind the Fees Must Fall movement. Nzimande has made this claim on several occasions over the past few weeks as the student protests became violent. “I am not aware of the third force myself. What we are dealing with here are basically genuine grievances of students that we are trying to address, which is why the president established this task team in order to ensure that we work with all stakeholders, including the students, to bring out normality in our institutions of higher learning.” Radebe said it was evident however that there were criminal elements. “For example, we were informed on Sunday that five out of the nine people who were arrested at Wits University were not students. So it is clear that there are people outside of campuses who might be involved in some of these incidences,” he added. 