Today signalled an end of the honeymoon for dysfunctional boards, said ANC national spokesperson Zizi Kodwa. Speaking after the chairperson relieved the SABC board from the communications committee meeting so members of Parliament could deliberate on a way forward, Kodwa said that the firm stand of MPs and resignation of two board members was “a warning” to board members of other state-owned enterprises that they needed to operate in terms of the rule of law. “Boards cannot take illegal decisions. They need to run efficiently. Today signals an end of the honeymoon,” said Kodwa who was in Parliament to observe proceedings. The committee had convened a special meeting today – during constituency recess period – in order to grill the board about controversial decisions it had made regarding Motsoeneng over the past few years also and more recently, his appointment to a new position as group executive of corporate affairs. Today was also significant because parties across the political spectrum had taken a “united stand to defend the rule of law and good corporate governance”, Kodwa said. Asked whether the ANC should have acted earlier to bring stability to the SABC, he said: “Better late than never.” Hlaudi Motsoeneng, who arrived for the meeting even though he was no longer an SABC board member, said he had no comment on proceedings. “I came to Parliament as part of the SABC team. Don’t worry I will speak my mind at the right time,” he said. SABC chairperson Mbulaheni Obert Maguvhe said he had no comment. Back inside the committee room, MPs deliberated on the technicalities regarding due process and the way forward for the SABC. In the meeting earlier, two members of the board, Krish Naidoo and Vusi Mavuso, announced that they had lost faith in the board and were thus resigning. The board was dysfunctional and should be dissolved, said Naidoo. Both Naidoo and Mavuso expressed their unhappiness with the how the board compiled its presentation to the committee on the state of affairs at the broadcaster. 