The Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University finds itself in the middle of two groups of students – those who want it to remain shut down over the #FeesMustFall movement, and those who are threatening legal action if it does. The Concerned Association of Parents and Others for Tertiary Education at Universities was formed at a special meeting at the German Club in Port Elizabeth last night. The meeting, between students, parents, and the lawyers of the “Open NMMU” group, met to discuss a way forward and find a solution that will enable the learners to continue with their classes for the remainder of the year. About 100 students from the university gathered at the entrance of University Way yesterday in a silent protest. The gathering was the first of three protests planned over the next three days to make a call for the university to be re-opened. The university was shut down following the beginning of the #FeesMustFall protests currently under way across the country. Speaking to City Press, the leaders of the Open NMMU protest said they couldn’t afford to lose a year of hard work when they had paid their fees. Ishaan Jassat said some of the students in the group were in their final year and their graduation would be delayed if the university remained closed. “The continued closure of the university will mean that even us who have paid have to be delayed in our life goals and lose out on employment opportunities that have already been secured,” said Jassat. “We believe that this is the beginning of a unified fight towards the realisation of the demands of the #FeesMustFall movement. “We, however, believe that delaying our education through the institution’s closure is not the correct discourse.” Jean Roux van Huysteen, one of the protest organisers, said people stayed away because they feared for their safety. “We are few today because since the break of the news that we will be engaging in the protest, we have been receiving threats from the other group.” There was a heavy presence of police, ready for action, should any fights take place. While the Open NMMU protesters sat silently in the field, five #FeesMustFall protest leaders approached them on a fact-finding mission. Lizo Jim, one of the leaders of the #FeesMustFall group, accused the others of sidelining themselves and speaking against their own call for the university to remain closed. The two sides wrangled over the matter and their different views of how the protests should be handled. “Do you understand the frustration you feel now that you want to go back to school and schools are closed?” said Jim. “That’s how we feel every day! “I don’t want you to understand our situation, I want you to sympathise with our call. There’s a fine line between the two. “The problem for me is when you take the whole protest and divide it on racial lines, we can’t as NNMU students divide ourselves like this,” said Jim. He said white students were protesting for the university to open and the black students were saying it is wrong. “Is it possible that we can come together as NNMU students, discuss and come to an agreement?” he asked. After a lengthy exchange the two groups decided that they would organise formal talks; the agreement was sealed with handshakes. “We are of the opinion that it would just require discussions from your side, our side. There should be no sides.” Jim said the OpenNMMU group were white advantaged students, who had no difficulties with paying fees. Van Huysteen disputed this, saying the group represented black students too. “They live in private flats here in Summerstrand and have cars; they have no understanding of our own struggle as poor students,” said Jim. “They are basically saying our struggle is not more important than their desire to continue with lessons.” The university management has warned students that they have until Monday to return to class or they won’t be able to complete their academic work for 2016. 