Johannesburg - Nkululeko “Bulldog” Mhlongo made his big bite felt at the Mangaung ­Cultural Festival (Macufe) when he beat local hero France Ramabolu by a unanimous points decision. The victory saw Mhlongo defend his South African and World Boxing Federation (WBF) African Pan-African junior middleweight titles. The sluggers were meeting for the second time for the same championship contest. In their first encounter in February at Mittah Seperepere Centre in Kimberley, Northern Cape, Gauteng-based Mhlongo beat Free State-based ­Ramabolu by a 10th round technical knockout. When the two gladiators collided this time, Mhlongo made a mockery of his foe with great punching power that saw the three judges – Beauty Thuthani, ­Baru Tlhoone and Tladi Pooe – score the bout 118-112; 120-108; and 120-108 respectively – all in favour of Mhlongo. As it is the norm with the Macufe ­festivities, the hall was packed to ­capacity by fans who came in numbers to spur on Ramabolu. But the crowds were disenchanted as Mhlongo, who enjoyed reach advantage, caught their idol at will with crisp shots and telling jabs. Not even the musical performance by the local five-member Bloemfontein Celtic ensemble Siwelele Band before the fight could inspire Ramabolu to win. He was rendered ineffective by the kingpin, whose superior work rate and ring craft made the challenger look very ordinary. The boxers went toe-to-toe in the fifth round with Ramabolu catching Mhlongo with telling body shots, but the latter used his reach advantage and superior punching power effectively to drive his man to the ropes with some great bombs, much to the delight of the crowd, which seemed to enjoy every moment of the action. Sensing that Ramabolu had run out of steam, Mhlongo went all out for a knockout in the last three rounds of the proceedings to enure that his belts did not remain in Mangaung. He punished his man with crisp left-right combinations to try and make him hit the deck, but the knockout punch did not come. The points victory came well deserved for a determined Bulldog and added spark to the Macufe festivities, which conclude on Sunday with a soccer match featuring Bloemfontein Celtic and Kaizer Chiefs at the Dr Petrus Molemela Stadium. Mhlongo’s record has now been stretched to 20 wins and three defeats from 23 fights, while Ramabolu has chalked up seven victories and three losses from 10 outings. “I have run out of opposition in South Africa because Ramabolu was the only credible challenger for my belt. "I’m looking forward to challenging for the WBF crown proper in the new year. Ramabolu tried to match me, but I was simply too good for him,” said Mhlongo after the fight. WBF president Howard Goldberg said it would be great for Mhlongo to be given a shot at the WBF diadem. “He put up a great showing and I think he deserves to be given the chance. He is simply impressive. We’ll see how it goes,” said Goldberg. In the main supporting Dream Team Promotions bout , Tello Lithebe of Free State beat Gauteng’s Rofhiwa Maemu by a split points decision to win the ­vacant WBF international featherweight diadem. Judges Ben Ncapai and Thabo Spampool scored it 115-113 and 116-112 respectively for Lithebe, while Boitumelo Madiba scored it 116-112 for Maemu. In the women’s SA junior featherweight championship, Matshidiso Mokebisi made a successful defence by beating challenger Melissa Muller on points.  