South Africa’s Olympians didn’t have a choice but to wear the baggy tracksuits at this year’s Rio Olympics because they were sponsored. Gideon Sam, president of the SA Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee (Sascoc), the controlling body for all high-performance sports in South Africa, explained to Parliament that the tracksuits worn by SA Olympians were sponsored by a Chinese company, and it cost more than R20 million to kit out South African sport teams over a four-year period. The tracksuits were criticised by sports fans for being ugly, oversized and outdated. Sam said unless somebody countered the company’s sponsorship, the team would continue wearing 361° sponsored tracksuits. “If in South Africa, there is a company or a union that has that kind of money, they should approach the sports movement, and say ‘disregard 361 degrees’.” He claimed that the tracksuits were tailored; that only one athlete, who had been overseas when they were tailored, complained and that some athletes preferred the baggy tracksuits. Sam was angry, questioning why MPs were reacting to an issue raised by one athlete. He conceded that Sascoc would ask the company to have another look at “the cut” of the tracksuit. “Many board members felt that we need to review the cut…” The sports department sought to put a spin on the tracksuit saga, with director-general Alec Moemi saying that despite the negative critique at home, the tracksuits were ranked first by international news channel Fox Sports in a global poll. But the Fox article appeared to be satire, and in fact was mocking the South African outfits. Moemi described Fox Sports as “a leading multinational around sport-related matters”. “Who should we believe? Often than not we are told that we have to believe he CNNs, BBCs and Fox Sports of this world. Who should we take seriously, those who call it a Ninja Turtle or international media who say it is the best outfit for Olympics?” he asked. “I don’t think the Olympics … it’s a fashion thing. It’s an issue of practicality. The key thing we must be most concerned about is the playing and participation kit. Is it constraining the athletes from performing better or doing well or not?” Moemi said South African media had previously criticised Sascoc for buying “expensive suits” saying this was a waste of money. MPs, from across the political party spectrum, were not hearing any of it. They told Sascoc to take the athletes’ complaints seriously and that the department and Sascoc should request that the sponsor provide clothing that is of good quality and cut for athletes. 