Advocate Thuli Madonsela may have officially stepped down as Public Protector, but a multiparty campaign is under way for MPs to bid her a proper farewell in Parliament. The Economic Freedom Fighters, who have been working hard behind the scenes to get united opposition support for their push to get Madonsela to return to Parliament to say goodbye to the nation, have already sent a request to Speaker Baleka Mbete. Floyd Shivambu, EFF chief whip, said that a draft resolution had been submitted. He expected that it would be submitted to the National Assembly next week for approval. Most political parties have indicated their support for the proposal, and the Democratic Alliance, African Christian Democratic Party, Congress of the People, United Democratic Movement, Inkatha Freedom Party and Freedom Front Plus have thrown their weight behind the EFF. Asked whether the ANC will support the resolution, ANC chief whip Jackson Mthembu said the ANC does not discuss party decisions with the media. He recently said that the ANC in Parliament would not find itself on the wrong side of the law again, as it did with the Nkandla debacle. Mthembu also said the ANC wanted to “cleanse and detoxify” itself of the reputational impairment it had suffered in Parliament and would ensure a “radical shift” in how it functioned in the House. “The ANC in Parliament will in both words and deed regain moral high ground, vigorously advance clean governance, champion the fight against corruption, shun incompetence and decisively deal with ill-discipline,” News24 reported. But last week the ANC MPs in the portfolio committee on justice snubbed Madonsela and decided not to have her present her office’s annual report to Parliament. Despite the opposition parties’ resistance, it was decided to revert back to the “original date” which meant the presentation would only be heard this week, after Madonsela’s term expired on Saturday. On Thursday Shivambu said he couldn’t speak on behalf of the ANC, but the EFF had the support of most political parties. Madonsela had interesting lessons that she could share regarding proper administration and how to deal with corruption he said. The EFF’s resolution was submitted under Rule 62 (2) of the new rules of the National Assembly. According to the rules, the National Assembly could, with a resolution, invite any person to address it. Cope spokesperson Dennis Bloem said his party supported the EFF’s resolution “100 percent”. “Madonsela deserves the honour for all the work that she did.” Freedom Front Plus chief whip Corné Mulder said it would be appropriate for Parliament to acknowledge the status of a chapter-nine institution that had set such an example. The developments came after certain opposition parties gave the ANC and the portfolio committee on justice and correctional services a drubbing in Parliament this week over their alleged “mistreatment” of Madonsela during her term in office. At the meeting with new Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane, EFF MP Sam Matiase said: “There is no denying that the former Public Protector was treated with unprecedented hostility. I hope this is now a thing of the past.” Shivambu also referred to the “abuse” of the former Public Protector by the committee, who said she was a Central Intelligence Agency-spy. ANC MPs have denied that they called Madonsela a CIA agent. Committee chairperson Mathole Motshekga warned MPs that they were in a parliamentary committee and not at a political rally. Madonsela that could not immediately be reached for comment, tweeted today: “I’ve learnt that throwing mud at someone says a lot more about you than about the person you are throwing mud at.”  . 