Losing track of what’s going on with the #FeesMustFall saga? We have you covered. Here are the top things that happened this week ... in quotes. “Go back to study.” President Jacob Zuma urging protesting students to return to class, saying there will be consequences for those who act criminally “The government is committed to do everything possible to progressively make higher education more affordable and free for the poor.” Zuma, during his speech at the higher education summit “Arrest criminal elements who are hijacking student protests.” Zuma, while condemning violence and the destruction of property “The summit is doing what South Africa does best - to meet and talk and find solutions. Together we find lasting solutions.” Zuma, saying the resolution taken last year not to increase fees was made through strategic dialogue and that the inquiry into higher education must be given a chance to find a way out of the impasse over fees Guards had received a call from the police to make arrests and arrested six students, who were taken to Mowbray police station. A student addressing a crowd gathered at the University of Cape Town, near the PD Hahn Building “What’s the difference between a student and a protester?” A student leader asking someone from the University of Cape Town’s law faculty “Why is it acceptable to continue lectures when you know there are black students outside?” Protesting students outside the UCT law faculty, who claimed that white students had been allowed to attend a lecture inside, while black students were locked outside “There are reports of sporadic protest action on the Westville and Howard College campuses.” University of KwaZulu-Natal spokesperson Lesiba Seshoka, after a group of about 20 people disrupted some lectures at Westville’s T and L Blocks earlier in the day “The resumption of classes will be decided later tomorrow and communicated to staff and students. All staff, however, are expected to report for duty, since the university remains open.” Cape Peninsula University of Technology spokesperson Lauren Kansley, who said lectures were interrupted and staff removed from their offices at its Mowbray, Cape Town, Bellville and Wellington campuses “I have listened to some protesters who say that they want their own Marikana. I was engaging a student yesterday who said that people must die to advance the movement.” Wits University vice-chancellor Adam Habib at the summit on higher education The call from students had been heard “loudly and clearly”. Zuma, who added that since 1994 everything possible was being done to help students from poor households obtain post-school education “You keep on shifting the goalpost all the time because you don't want us to have a proper engagement. I want people to know that last year you agreed on a maximum 6% increase. Then we were all supposed to go out and convince our constituencies to accept that. The moment we left that meeting you never did that. You left me on my own, thrown under a bus.” Higher Education Minister Blade Nzimande lashing out at student leaders 